One we're missing is Vanessa.
Let's get started anyway. Right.
Let's, uh, get the first one in. Oh, sorry. Um,
since I can spread right out now.
Heaps of room. You could take it. Both sides.
I could have gone over. They come over here.
Nah, it's all right. I like it here. The trouble.
You're not on screen. It's, I'm watching that.
If I speak, it will be, oh yeah. Cool. Good morning.
Good morning.
Oh, Scott's here. Can we sit up here, Scott,
because, um, we've got nine else.
Yeah. Bring your tag. Bring your tag.
Thank you. Right. Um, Mr. What?
Kia ki Now we've got 10 minutes with you.
Um, so I will say this in the outset
because for anyone listening, um,
please leave some time for questioning.
Um, we've all read your submissions.
Um, so I suggest, and I know you're very skilled,
but I'm just saying this publicly.
Throw out the, the major points you want us to hear.
Uh, leave the detail, um,
and leave a little bit time for questions.
That'd be fantastic. Floor. Always yours. Thank
You, Kiara. And thank
you for having me. Um,
we support the stated purpose of the arms bill in so far
that it does provide greater protection for the public
and explicitly states that firearms are a,
or ownership of firearms is a privilege and not a right.
Our members are the most,
or the biggest cohort that is at risk of the
manufacture, distribution, and use of firearms.
And we implore the select committee
and, uh, to take that on board when considering, uh,
the recommendations.
We've highlighted a number of points, uh, within the,
our submissions that go to, uh, diminishing,
I suppose the, uh, security
and safety of our membership, uh, and offices out there.
And, uh, take the time
to highlight just those main points for you here.
Now, before question time one in particular is, uh,
we do have concerns around the transparency
and decision making processes
that have been employed throughout this process, uh,
including the inadequate consultation
and limits on the time to develop, uh,
the appropriate legislation
and explore alternatives to this.
There is a proposed weakening in regards to the connection
between the police and the firearm safety authority
or the regulator as a result, uh, of the proposed changes.
And we see this as detrimental to our members in the sense
that intelligence may be lost and safety
and security reasons are less than
because of that, uh, that fracture, I suppose,
in the relationship or the removal of police from the, uh,
from that relationship.
We also see, uh, uh,
or have an issue with the simplifying of the regulatory
regulatory requirements.
When we consider the nature of, of all things, um,
that can be simplified.
Firearms isn't one of 'em.
Um, it's vitally important that we don't simplify
that process and that we really are, you know, keep
that stringent and tight.
There's a couple of areas that we think, uh, the, uh,
select committee can, um, make some improvements on.
One in particular is raising the age from 16 to 18 years
for firearms license holders,
and also the potential of introducing a system, uh,
very similar to the learner's license.
Currently within the firearms law,
you have a graduated system for a pistol, for example,
where you'll have to join a pistol club, go to the club.
We see, uh, an opportunity here, uh, for
a graduated type license system in regards
to firearms as well.
So I submit those, the, uh, the main points, uh, in regards
to our submission and, uh, open, they open up for questions.
Okay. Members. Right, Mr. Scott Willis.
Thank you. Yes. Um, we have certainly heard that, uh,
there's, there's a concern that this has been a bit of a
speedy process, that there hasn't been wide engagement.
In fact, you know, there's been specific engagement,
but not as wise as it could have been.
Do you think this is, um, I mean, you've, you've pointed to
that risk in that there's, there's a concern that we might
end up with something that isn't quite delivering
what it says it's gonna deliver in terms of safety in
that respect, the recommendations that you're making,
they're quite important in terms of a graduated license,
but, or I also wanna think about where the, um,
chief executive, what's the question is, is how, uh,
appointed, what are your thoughts on, on that Yes.
Appointment? Yeah, and look, when we, um,
and that goes right to the heart
of the license review process, for example,
what's really important is
that we have a transparent nature here.
Mm-hmm. It needs to be a credible model in which people are
appointed on a merit based system.
If that doesn't happen, uh, then unfortunately, the,
the proposed bill will lack that transparency
and potential impact that it should have.
Uh, we're talking about firearms here,
and it's really important that we get this right
and that the, um, nature is, is transparent
and it's merit based, not, um, the other way around.
Okay. Uh, honorable Ginny Anderson,
Uh, thank you very much. Just
checking. You can hear me okay? Yeah.
Yep. That's great. Um, Steve, I'm just interested in,
um, you, you touched on the FSA
and the intelligence may be lost.
Um, it is, uh, there, there is, it's quite clear
that police,
or even as referred to as the Minister blue shirts are sort
of removed from, um, any kind of decision making role
or any ability, um, within, um, FSA.
I'm just interested to know why, why do you think
that has happened?
It to, to me, it seems that that's where you've got a body
of institutional knowledge
and excluding that from decision making seems perverse.
And just interested to see if you've thought about why
that might have been, um, who position?
Um, look, I think it, again, it comes down
to the transparent nature of, of the process
and the limited time in which we've had to, um, consult
and look at alternatives.
Uh, it's really sort of been railroaded a little bit, um,
which I unfortunately has, uh, seen us end up where we are.
Uh, the police being part
of the FSA is an extremely important, um, issue for us
as it does provide safety
and security for our members in the sense that there is
coherent information sharing
and there is a robust system in place whereby,
uh, we can share that information and make sure that safety
and security is at the forefront of not only the public,
but also members of police.
I've got one more question quickly. Sorry, Andrew.
Um, uh, would you consider that simply removing police
or sworn police from, from decision making roles seems
to be an I ideological, uh, position as opposed
to having any practical outcome?
Yeah, look, I would agree with that.
Um, ultimately it's vitally important.
Police are engaged throughout the whole process,
including being in the FSA.
Okay. Um, Mr. Todd Stevenson.
So supplementary our primary.
So you think it's good governance to have the regulator
and the enforcer as the same group of people?
Mm-hmm. Uh, yes.
And ultimately, um, the police have done that role
for a number of years and have done it very, very well.
Uh, there's nothing to suggest that, uh, that side
of it has been, has been lacking.
So, um, I would suggest that yes, that is appropriate.
That's, you think that's appropriate governance?
Uh, it's, as I say, it's been working for a very,
very long time and yes, it would be appropriate. I
Don't think you understood Mr.
Stanley's question. Yeah.
He was asking does, do you think the governance,
having a separate organization managing the firearms safety
is a good governance model? Yes. This question,
Uh, I think you can have both.
Uh, you can have the police involved in the system.
Uh, it can be governed, uh, by a chief executive that is,
sits outside of the police.
However, it's that interaction between the two
that is vitally important
and you need both to be in the room, so to speak,
to make sure that that can happen.
So, can I just ask a question?
What, um, what is stopping you from being in the room?
Is there you don't see any, um, mechanism for you to be able
to participate in, in sharing of intelligence
or what, what is the concern?
And this, because I understand the point, right? Yes.
But, and we all want police of course, have a lot
of information intelligence get that.
Yes. Is there is a mechanism, if you accept the argument
that you're gonna have a separate firearms authority,
is there a mechanism that you'd like to see enshrined
that would enable that sharing of intelligence?
Both in a precautionary manner,
but also, you know, in other aspects?
And I think that's one of the problems is
that we don't know what
that method is at the present point of time.
Uh, we are obviously, uh, integrated with the FSA,
we have boots on the ground, so to speak.
What we don't know is what does that future state look like?
Um, how do they share that information?
How do, uh, we interact with each other to get the best
for the public of New Zealand?
That's what we don't know at the moment,
and that's what's a little bit scary.
Righto. Thank you. I'm gonna take last question from Mr.
Kaba.
Thanks Chair. Um, in your, in the submission, you referred
to a deactivated, uh, firearm doesn't have a definition.
Um, you don't necessarily provide
what you see the definition as needing to be.
And I wondered if you have wording for a proposed definition
of a deactivated firearm?
Yeah, so deactivated is a little bit obscure in our
opinion, in the sense that if you take, for example,
an MSSA, you can turn that into a, uh, a normal firearm,
but it still holds critical parts that can be changed back,
uh, and make it back into its original state.
As an MSSA, we suggest that deactivation, uh,
would actually mean, or should mean inoperable
or incapable of being used at all.
Um, 'cause as it stands at the moment, uh,
there is an opportunity to return a firearm back
to its born state.
Right. Thank you. Mr.
Um, what, what, I'm gonna ask you a little bit of homework.
Um, that question. If you accept that you are,
that we will have a, um, a
separate firearm safety authority,
what mechanism would you like to see where there is a better
and play between New Zealand police, particularly
around sharing of intelligence?
How would you see that working? Well,
Yes. Uh,
don't do that now,
but I'd ask you to return to the committee
and there's maybe some ideas on that. Lovely.
Thank you very much. Alright.
Thank you very Much. Thank you.
Sorry, when I'm losing my voice slightly.
Right now, I'm gonna ask Mr.
Uh, Joe Dunsky, um, from the Taranaki branch
of the New Zealand an Historical Arms Association.
Welcome. Hey, thank you. Now you've heard what I've said.
You've got 10 minutes. Yep.
Please leave some time question,
but I key issues. Thank you very much. Yep,
Thank you. So, um,
I just wanted to introduce myself and the branch.
So we are a collection of people in Taranaki
that services Taranaki region.
Um, I myself have been a member for 21 years
and, um, served as secretary Treasurer for 14 of those.
Um, the people that I liaise with are, um,
a ages age from 18 to 90,
and are all really good people that I've interacted with.
I really enjoy the camaraderie that I have,
and these are the people that are mostly affected
by this legislation.
And, um, I would actually like to applaud the committee
and people pushing this idea because it's, in my opinion
and that opinion of the branch,
that the first steps in the right direction on this matter,
considering the damage that was done post legislation,
post Christchurch, um, we need to get this right.
This is a massively important issue for my community,
for the New Zealand community and everybody involved.
And, um, to move away from what was probably some
of the best farms legislation in the world prior
to Christchurch to what we have now,
what is was pretty appalling.
So it's just, I'd just like to acknowledge
to step in the right direction.
Um, since, like, since Christchurch,
we've had no real benefit,
but a lot of extra drama put on my arm fraternity.
And, um, again, just reinforces that first point.
We've had a lot of costs, costs input on, on us,
and, um, with no, and definitely a decline in service.
It's really affected relationships with, with the,
with authorities, which have always been strong.
But I find my fraternity tends to have to question
and get advice and get and recorrect stuff.
Um, the lack of simplicity in the process is probably the
biggest, biggest problem that we, we face.
And a lack of interpretation with the police, like
as a gentleman just spoke previously, like
that relationship is key,
but it has to, uh, has to be defined better with that.
And, um, as, as the secretary monthly
in our monthly meetings, I'm constantly noting people
and members, members of friends of members who've had issues
with this, with this interaction with the police
and simplicity coming down the chain.
If everything was relatively simple
or more simplified, it could be easier to enforce, easier
to easier for the police.
Just be clear about what you mean.
Um, yeah. Okay. So simplicity.
I'll get back to that point. I'm just trying
to set the scene of how we have to deal.
So sorry. Is it, but basically the key things, um,
that in our submission that we've tabled is the falsifying
of the markings pieces around
that falsify in the markings is easy to,
for misinterpretation
because a lot of items from the collecting fraternity, uh,
bring backs from overseas.
And some have been arsenal reworked,
and that's part of the history of each item.
So they may have, will have multiple markings,
some will have British acceptance markings from things
that have moved through Great Britain to get to New Zealand.
So the, the key points in the arms act around
that is something that probably needs to be cleared up.
Again, probably simplified to work with what we're doing.
Again, the register doesn't help in this regard
because some of these items like maternity fields probably
don't need to be registered.
But that's, that's where we are at
and that's the problems that stepping down
that road registration tends to bring about.
Uh, the next item, the car, uh, the 0.2, uh,
2, 5, 4, the carriage of pistols
and restricted items needs addressing
because again, we do, we do have, have previously had prev,
um, freedom of movement around stuff,
but the legislation around that
and details around having them
encapsulated in the curtilage of our own homes
is probably not appropriate because as collected
and stuff we run as a fraternity.
We run events, we run shows, we just display.
And some of that, some of that legislation around that
isn't, isn't helpful.
The wordings need to be reworked
because we need to be able to entice and show people,
because that's half of what we do.
And to honor and respect history and
'cause a lot of these items that we have in New Zealand have
been brought back by Anzacs servicemen serving overseas.
So it's all right to have them in our own curtilage
of our own homes and dwelling for our own private use.
But we also like to display
or share knowledge with stuff, bring things along
for meetings to discuss and help educate stuff.
Like I talked about the people in my branch,
our age range is from 18 to 90,
and these people, these people,
some have been collecting for many years.
Some are new to the fraternity.
So to build that knowledge
and share that knowledge, it's important to be able
to have freedom of movement from items from our home
to meeting venues, to shows to opportunities for sale.
Um, point 27 on the requirements of possession of li uh,
the requirements on possession of large capacity magazines.
Again, this, this movement with after,
after Christchurch has been added no value
to what we, what we have.
Magazines are just the item that you can add to the firearm.
The issue, the key issue is the firearm.
So numbering how many magazines you have.
Some people have collected many items of in many pieces
of these magazines and have to number them all
and deface them as such as some would virtual portray.
It is not helpful to any regards to safety.
We've already vetted the person,
we've already vetted their storage,
they fit and proper with.
We've said that's okay to have them.
I tap to count 'em off and to number them.
It's, it's not really relevant in, in regards to, um,
keeping things safe
and making, keeping people safe around that type of stuff.
And that, that's our opinion of our fraternity.
And then the definition of antique firearm,
that's a really coolly one,
and that probably needs to be open to a discussion group.
And that was, that's our recommendation
because there's,
you can't necessarily draw a line in the sand around that.
The basic rule of thumb we got is anything prior to 1899,
but there are some items that aren't necessarily included
or encapsulated inside that things with obsolete cartridges
or actions that are, are too frail to, to, um,
to be able to use rounds.
So they are just collectible items and so
therefore it, it needs to be, there needs to be a rule, uh,
needs to be a ability to, um,
readdress these rather than have something set in stone.
So those are the three, uh, four key points that I need
to focus on for legislation. But I appreciate your time.
Thank you. Um, Mr.
Cal Bates,
sorry, chair, that was not logged from last time.
Oh, right, okay. Um, just on the carriage you talked about
going to a and p shows or whatever.
Yeah. Demonstrating, so we're talking about pre 1899?
Uh, no, that the carriage is for everything
that we possess as collectible items.
Okay. And just
so just obviously you're here under the guise
of antique and historical arms.
What does that mean then? Just to be clear, what,
Uh, the, the name?
Oh, so no, what
Type of arms are we talking about there?
Oh, we, so as a collecting fraternity,
we, we collect everything.
So it's antique and historical arms
and all sorts of variants.
So they, we could start with, if we, we go
through the progression, progression of military history,
we could start with flintlocks that are used
by the British Army right up to more modern equipment used.
So your, your issue with the more modern equipment piece,
obviously in 18, pre 1899, um, was a
type of arm is quite different from a SL or whatever.
A hundred percent. So what's your, your issue with the, um,
going to shows or whatever in demonstrating, just,
just be a bit clearer about what you mean by that.
Um, yeah, I'll just probably have
to probably read the guidance I've noted on that.
Sorry. Um, um, but essentially, um, the ruling
makes it more, makes it more difficult for us to, or,
or makes it, or tries to allude to
that is not a proper process to be able
to remove them from our home and take them to these places.
Like, and they're supposed to be in the safes
or on display within the home.
And that's, that's
what I understand about the issue.
Maybe you, um, we're running outta time. Yep.
Might be an area that you just come back to us be about.
Yep. No, happy as. Thank you very much.
Alright. Hey, thank you for your submission.
Um, right now we've got the New Zealand, uh,
desktop Association.
Mr, is it? Yes. Yeah. Mr.
Thur lengthy, um, submission.
Good morning, everybody. I'm, uh, Gwen Thurlow, the CEO
and General Counsel here at the, the New Zealand De Talkers.
Um, by way of background, the dear store
represents its 13,000 members who are big game hunters.
We have 35,000 supporters, 49 branches,
and we represent the approximately 85,000 big game hunters.
Firstly, NZJ would like to note that we support the bill
with some reservations.
Uh, we support the decision to repeal
and replace the Arms Act 1983,
and we support firearms regulation that is practical,
proportionate evidence-based,
and focus on genuine public safety outcomes.
Uh, we think it's important to avoid unnecessary costs.
We've seen overly complex regulations
and we've seen a large administrative burden placed on,
on licensed firearm holders.
We also believe that firearms have a place in New Zealand
and should be in the possession of fit and proper people.
And we feel it's appropriate
that the arms bill focuses on the fit and proper test.
While we support the bill's overall direction,
there are areas where we are disappointed
and our community have let us know, including the retention
of the Non Pistols shooting clubs
and Rangers framework, which the government had promised
to reveal, and the limited progress arising from the
firearms registry review.
In addition, there have been aspects of implementation,
the timeframes, the transitional arrangements,
which we think would be beneficial if they could be refined.
And we provided detailed, uh, requests
and timeframes in the back of our submission.
Uh, NZDA wants to be clear that the final form of the bill
and now, and now opinion reflects political compromise
rather than a genuinely risk-based reset of firearms law.
While the bill is an improvement on a fragmented
and poorly implemented framework, which it is going
to replace its outcome, has been materially constrained
by political fear, media pressure over the last two years,
and a continued reluctance by part of the political system
to engage honestly with firearms policy.
Firearms law in New Zealand continues to be shaped by bias
and fear rather than by objective assessment of
who possesses risk and who does not.
It is particularly frustrating at a time when farmers,
landowners, conservation agencies, local communities,
are all calling for more effective game animal control,
pest animal control, and better bio biodiversity outcomes.
Yet we see successive governments continue to restrict,
complicate, and stigmatize the use of firearms,
primarily the most effective tool
for achieving those outcomes.
This contradiction between public demands for control
of our PEs and game animals
and an ongoing mistrust
of firearms users has not been resolved by this bill.
NZD has also disappointed
that certain shooting sports remain prohibited, not
because of demonstrated safety risk, but
because of political sensitivity.
While NZDA does not re represent all shooting disciplines,
we support lawful sport fit and proper individuals
and evidence-based regulation.
The continued prohibition of some activities reflects a lack
of courage to distinguish between criminal misuse
and legitimate supervised sporting use.
Accordingly. While the NZDA supports the bill
as a necessary step,
it does not represent the best
possible outcome for our sport.
For hunting for game animal
and pest manage animal species management,
or for New Zealand's wider biodiversity objectives.
We say that this bill is a step and it's not an end point.
And it reflects a process
achieved despite political restraint and not
because those constraints no longer exist.
Since 2019,
many law abiding firearms users have experienced firearms
regulatory system as adversarial, inconsistent,
and at times openly distrustful of fit
and proper license holders for a large proportion
of the firearms community.
The period following the 2019 reforms has been characterized
by frustration, uncertainty,
and a sense of being collectively blamed
and stigmatized for actions that they did not commit.
The NZJ considers that the way many responsible hunters,
shooters, volunteers, collectors,
and rural firearms users have felt
and been treated over the past several years,
has not been acceptable.
Decisions have been appeared to be driven by assumption
and not evidence by compliance targets bias rather than
public safety outcomes.
And by institutional risk aversion rather
than a sense of fairness.
Despite repeated assurances,
there has been no meaningful acknowledgement
of the distress, the financial costs and loss,
or the loss of trust experienced
by the compliant firearms community.
And as a result, rush legislation, the change,
the buyback poor implementation
and constant inconsistency of regulatory practice,
privacy concerns relating to the firearms remain unresolved.
And we continue to see people discouraged from engagement,
particularly among those who store firearms in locations
and those who have legitimate concerns about their data
security and their home security.
There is a digital divide and the digital divide is ongoing.
We've had people say that they can't engage
with the current licensing system and the renewal system
or the register system.
This is because we have poor internet access,
limited digital literacy,
and an absence of meaningful digital alternatives
that have created barriers
to dis disproportionately affect the licensed
farm owners community.
You can just look at the stats relating to registration
to see that this is true.
NZJ does not accept
that these outcomes have been accidental or significant.
The data does not lie when lawful fit
and proper people exit the system because,
because it has become too difficult, too intrusive,
too hostile to engage
with public safety is actually not improved.
Instead, the regulatory system became narrower,
less representative increasingly disconnected from the
communities it was meant to regulate.
And these outcomes point, not to a failure
of our law abiding firearms owner community,
but they point to a failure of a system
and its design and its implementation.
NZA is deeply concerned about the ongoing
and unresolved question of cost.
The firearms registry, the licensing system,
the associated regulatory infrastructure,
have all been at the significant public expenditure
with little transparency
around the long-term operational cost, any value for money,
or any measurable safety benefit.
This bill contemplates a new regulatory agency.
Further systems development
and an expanded regulatory function.
NZDA considers it essential that the true cost
of this framework is acknowledged and justified.
Law abiding firearms users
and taxpayers are entitled to ask whether the system
that is being built is effective, proportionate,
and even affordable and sustainable.
Who is asking the question?
Are the changes you are making making us safer?
NZJA records strong concern that the continued freezing
and crystallization of the shooting clubs
and ranger system is an ongoing and unresolved issue.
Since 2019, the ability to establish certifying role
or expand shooting ranges has stalled.
This has had a direct
and negative impact on safe supervised environments
where people can learn to shoot, maintain competence,
undertake hunter training and education, train
and ethical firearms use
and participate in competition shooting.
This result is a paradox created by a bad law.
Firearms users are expected to meet higher standards
of safety and compliance.
While access to lawful safe practical training facilities
has been constrained by the law.
This isn't a theoretical issue.
Across New Zealand clubs reported declining range
availability, volunteer burnout
and regulatory uncertainty
that has deferred investment and development.
Without access to ranges,
new license holders struggle to gain experience.
Experience. Hunters struggle to maintain skills
and organized competition becomes less viable.
A system that restricts access
to ranges while demanding high compliance is internally
inconsistent and ultimately counterproductive to our safety.
NZDA considers that the continued inclusion of the clubs
and rangers parts relating
to non pistols organizations within this restrictive
regulatory rack framework without a clear pathway forward
to enable new and existing facilities to be maintained
and kept open, represents a serious and unresolved flaw.
In this bill, we suggest part six.
The new part five should be repealed.
If the government is serious about safety, ethics,
compliance, it must address
how people are practically expected to learn, train,
and shoot in safe environments.
Without reform in this area, the objectives
of the whole bill will remain partially unachievable.
NZDA places these concerns on record, not
as abstract policy objections,
but as a reflection of
what has occurred across our membership over the
last intervening years.
Since 2019.
These are our live realities
and they're not addressed through this bill
through regulation or implementation.
Then if we need a future reform, we must take the bold step
to seek to repeal
and replace certain parts of this bill
that is gonna be put to the house.
So in summary, NZJ supports the ARM bill
as necessary in an overdue step towards repairing some
of the damage from the regulatory framework
that has been weakened by years of reactive
and poorly coordinated reform.
The repeal and replacement
of the 1983 ACT is the right approach,
and the bill is clearly an improvement,
but as it stands, it is not the best we could do.
NZDA must state plan you
that the bill does not go far enough.
It fails to meaningly unwind many
of the bad policy decisions the overregulation
and the structural failures introduced since 2019.
And that is despite clear evidence that any
of those have improved public safety, too much
of the post 19 framework maintains intact.
Pardon? Gonna stop. Okay.
I'm disappointed because I really wanted to ask you about
what you wanted around non pistols,
but you've used your time.
That's okay. It's in the written submission stuff.
Yeah, I know. I've seen, yeah, I read the submission.
It's all in the written submission.
Yeah, I've seen the submission,
but it doesn't actually help us in sufficient detail.
But thank you for your submission. Yeah,
Thank you for your time.
Right. Um, can I, uh, call, uh, Ms, uh,
YAB up to the stage?
Thank you.
Uh, Koto call Philippi Ya Baker ho.
Uh, I'm here on behalf of gun control NZ
and I'm also doing my personal submission.
I will, uh, run two together in the interest of time
and not, uh, make too much of a pretense
of which hat I'm wearing.
Uh, so Gun Control NZ is a membership based organization
that advocates for sensible firearms law.
Uh, we support the use of firearms in New Zealand
for hunting and some sport shooting.
Uh, members are a mix of both license
and non-licensed holders.
And, uh, we put in a submission, uh,
which in which we had 6,544 people sign
up to in support.
Uh, we took that approach.
Instead of encouraging people
to write individual submissions,
we thought it would be easier to give them a sort
of a prefilled thing, which I know makes, uh, the, uh, work
of the committee much easier rather than having had,
you know, know thousands of people putting things
through chat GPT.
Um, a little bit about myself.
Um, I, uh, am on the Board of Transparency International nz
and I've done some work on transparency,
but I'm not representing those organizations.
But obviously that has influenced, uh, my perspective.
I have also, uh, historically worked as a public servant
and have quite a bit of experience with, uh,
law reform processes.
So I think this bill
is not particularly revolutionary.
It is really fundamentally a rewrite, uh,
which is a technical process of trying
to improve legislation.
Unfortunately, it's been done under considerable time
pressure and the result is actually really poor.
And I don't want this to be taken as any criticism
of PCO or the officials.
Um, but I think the,
the timeframes have just been impossible
to put in a reasonable bill.
There it is riddled with errors.
I'm not a particularly detailed focused person,
but I have found dozens, I've pointed them out.
Um, but I think that, uh,
if the bill is passed in its current state, we're going
to be back here many, many times trying
to fix those mistakes.
And some of them, you know, they're just in the drafting,
it's, they're not about policy changes,
but they just are many, many errors.
So, um, I I would be very cautious about passing this bill
given, given the way that it has been drafted.
I know the minister has talked about the risks
around hasty legislative changes,
and unfortunately, this is yet another hasty change.
Um, there are some minor safety improvements in the bill.
Um, the regulation pistol magazines is excellent.
Um, very glad to see, uh,
no more importing blank firing guns.
But there are also some, um, things
that probably decrease public safety.
Um, the extended license period.
So for example, the fact that, uh,
pest controllers will only be vetted every five years, uh,
seems very high risk, um,
but probably most significant about this bill.
Um, the biggest change is the changes to the regulator.
Um, and those are quite significant, unfortunately.
Uh, the minister for some reason has proposed a very
unconstitutionally precedent arrangement
for appointing the chief executor regulator.
Um, all public service bodies get appointed
through an independent process, uh, run
by the Public Service Commission,
and for some reason she's created a whole new set
of arrangements here when really should just be relying on
the Public Service Act to, to create this regulator.
Um, this, there is a giant risk here
of stepping away from merit based appointments,
which has been a cornerstone
of the New Zealand Public Service for, you know,
probably more than a century.
Um, and this is a really big risk.
Um, and, and the risk cuts both ways.
You know, it could be that, you know, someone's appointed
who I think is far too close to the gun lobby,
but alternatively, it could also be, you know,
governments change and suddenly it's someone who's seen
as like, completely hostile to the interests of gun owners.
Um, so it really is important to go for a,
a merit-based approach.
Um, you know, I, I've been listening to some
of the submitters and there's been a lot
of discussion about the feelings of gun owners.
Um, and I think that, uh,
far too much emphasis has been placed on
the minority of gun owners.
Um, the ones who are organized,
who are passionate about the sport,
who comes submit to select committee.
But the vast majority of gun owners do not belong to any
of the organizations that, that come and submit here.
And, uh, we know that they are confident in the regulator.
Um, surveys of them show that two thirds
of gun owners have confidence in the regulator currently,
which is an improvement.
So, um, we should place that data point against
what we hear from, um, some
of the people submitting to the committee.
Um, I'm also concerned about the timeframes.
Um, the commencement dates is sort of like, you know,
whenever the orders and council signed
and, um, there is a giant risk here from rushed
implementation that the regulator will be put in place too
quickly, that systems will fall over.
Um, I'm concerned about the risks
of breaking the relationship with the police.
There needs to be a really close relationship
for the sharing of intelligence.
It's not just about sharing of data,
but it's also about relationships.
And I think the bill's hostility towards police involvement
in the regulator is risky.
It does increase the risk
of those relationships breaking down.
Um, I see a lot more cost in the system.
Um, for example, the,
the review committee seems a very expensive way
of fixing something that isn't broken.
Um, the current internal review process overturns about 30%
of the decisions, which suggests
that it is actually working quite well.
Uh, the new process I think will be much more expensive.
It also, uh, risks public trust in the process.
Um, I think the involvement
of license holds the representatives
is actually quite dangerous.
I think, uh, those kind of decisions need
to be made independently.
Um, and it's kind of an unusual bill.
'cause often, you know,
I think it does risk poor safety
outcomes from these changes.
And often we, we see poor safety outcomes come when people
cut corners and cut costs.
Unfortunately, this bill is likely to both increase costs
and deliver worth safety outcomes.
Um, I, I have colleagues who come to select committee before
and warned about risks in the ARMS Act.
Um, quite famously, L Gillespie came,
I think about 10 years ago to warn about the lack
of regulation on semi-automatic firearms
and warning about the risks.
And very tragically, we were all talking about
that in the Christchurch Coronial inquiry.
Um, this bill is probably nowhere near as high risk,
but it does miss the opportunity to update our laws in line
of things like the Bondi attack and in recognition of new
and emerging risks.
Um, so in summary, I think the bill's not terrible,
but it is messy
and it, it does risk needing to be revised again
and again to iron out all the kinks
that we've, we've forgotten.
I don't think it is yet a stable policy equilibrium.
Anyway, I will stop there and questions. Okay.
Um, honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Oh, got. Um, and thank you for that submission
and all the work that you've done on it.
Um, one question I have, um, that we put to the minister was
around the minister's powers to, um, exempt, um,
pretty much anything or anyone from the rules.
So for example, um,
and the example given to her was she could exempt
sports shooters from the semi-automatic ban
so that they could engage in three gun sports events.
Have you got any views on the minister having powers
to essentially make changes of that magnitude?
Uh, so I should put in my disclaimer of I'm not a lawyer.
Um, I did not pick that up.
There certainly are some quite wide
ranging exemption powers.
So for example, the power to exempt certain kinds
of ammunition from regulation, certain kinds of firearms,
taking them completely out of the system.
I think some of the definitions are very problematic.
Um, I think unfortunately this is a system where you do need
to leave a certain amount of ministerial discretion
because of the rapid changes in technology.
Um, and so those might be appropriate,
but I would be extremely concerned about any ability
to enable the use of semi-automatic firearms
for shooting competitions. I think that's,
I I guess if I can just follow up with the supplementary,
if I agree that you need to be able to keep up
with rapid changes that would generally be seen as
increasing regulation rather than lowering the bar.
Yeah. Would you see that kind of, um,
measure as being appropriate?
Yeah, so I, I, I'm kind of more, I think it's more sort
of, you want a one way ratchet.
You don't want the ability to exempt things,
but you want the ability to add things in.
Um, so that the direction is only one way
of increasing regulation
and if it needs to be decrease is really parliament.
Right. Uh, Todd Stevenson.
Hi. Thank you. And thank you for being here.
In your submission, just,
I just wanna give you the opportunity to respond
because, um, you,
you said 6,544 people signed on your submission.
A concern was, uh, raised directly with us,
but, um, we told people that raised it to go to you.
Um, their concern was
that people were given a draft submission to sign on to,
not the final submission.
Mm-hmm. Can you just comment on the process about how,
Just so that as, so we put up a two,
I think somebody got in touch with me about this.
We put up a, a two page submission, uh, that was in,
and all that's been made that is a few minor kind
of typographical edits.
Um, there were only grammatical changes.
There was a much longer submission,
which people weren't signing up to their own, signing up
to the, the two page summary.
And there weren't any substantive changes in that between
what we put up at the start of the process
and what we submitted, except
for a small amount of copy editing
First two pages. Yeah,
I was gonna say, just to be clear,
just for the committee and for everyone.
Yeah. So that would be what the first two pages
Of this document? Two or three, yeah.
Okay. Thank you. Just so we're clear on that.
Yeah. Okay. Uh, honorable Ginny Anderson.
Thank you very much. Um, uh, thank you
for your submission, Philippa.
Um, you talked a little bit about the
changes to the regulator.
Do you, do you have a view on the fact that a lot
of the detail will sit in the regulations, uh,
of this legislation
and we, we still don't, uh, seem to have that detail?
Um, if you could comment on that and,
and if you have time, would, would you be able to highlight
for the committee if there's one area you would make a
change or strengthen this bill?
What, what would that be?
Um, I, I think, uh, the, the balance
between legislation regulation has been something
that's been discussed quite a bit.
Um, I know the minister has previously wanted
to move things from regulation into legislation.
I think again, there was just a question of time
and the officials didn't have time
to actually really consider that balance.
Um, there probably are many things that you would want
to move and if you had a longer process, um,
the officials could have done that work.
Uh, for me, I think some
of the critical issues are those factors around licensing.
So at the moment in the regulations, we have all of the, um,
issues around people who've lived overseas,
how long they've lived overseas, and whether
or not they can get a license.
These changes were made in response
to the Christchurch terrorist who had, you know,
not lived in New Zealand very long
and didn't really have a, a local sort
of social support basis.
Um, those are all currently in the regulations, um,
and I think they probably do deserve to be,
to be brought up, um, into the legislation.
Alright. Hey, thank you
for your presentation this morning.
Um, I'm going to ask, um, Mr. Gro and Mr.
Van do Christian games slight change.
I, I, sorry, that's the names I have. Sorry. Sorry.
Right. We've got 10 minutes review. Mm-hmm.
Um, morning. My name's Corina Jordan.
I'm the CEO of Fish and Game New Zealand.
I'm a licensed firearms owner,
have been since the age of 18.
And I'm on the, um,
police commissioner's Firearm
Community Advisory forum as well.
Uh, Kira, I'm Richie Koska.
I'm the Chief Operating Officer
of Fish and Game New Zealand.
Um, I, in the interest of full disclosure, I'm also a member
of the Police Commissioner's FCC committee.
I'm also a member of the Firearm Safety Authorities working
group entrusted with building a community trace community
based firearm safety training model.
I also volunteer at once a month
as a senior range officer at the McLean's Island Shooting
Complex, where members of the public can come
and use their firearms in a safe, controlled environment.
I've also had a firearms license since the age of 16, very
Good for sing games,
a statutory organization under the Conservation Act
and has powers under the Wildlife Act as well, as well
as other acts that we work under.
We represent about 175,000, uh, license
holders there across the, um, game birds
and also sports fishing.
And the, our submissions today mostly relate
and mostly relate to our game bird functions.
Um, as part of our statutory functions, we, um, also have
registered, uh, compliance officers or rangers.
And so, um, as part of the game bird season,
we'll go out there into the field, um, engage
with our firearms owners, our game bird hunters, um,
and ensure that the regulations
around game bird hunting are being implemented.
Um, as part of that we will seize, we can seize
and hold firearms on our premises.
Um, and also we hold firearms on our premises
for game animal management as well.
So if you've read our submission, you understand that we,
um, support the reforms
and today we just wanna quickly go
through the five key points from our submissions
and leave to plenty of time for questions.
Um, we believe the drafting may have not fully considered
the practical implications
for law abiding license holders in some areas
and organizations like our own.
Uh, an example would be, um, for us to hold firearms, uh,
within our premises, they need to be, uh, registered to one
of our, uh, staff members in
that obviously provides complications when we're,
when we're managing our teams.
As an example. And we'll talk Richie,
we'll talk more about that in a minute.
These are not challenges
to the bull's purpose, which we support.
We support it easier for people to become firearms owners
and legitimate firearms users.
These are a really useful tool, not only in relation
to our hunters, but also our wider communities.
They're part of the fabric of rural New Zealand,
for example, and are a core tool within some
of our lower socioeconomic communities that need these tools
to be able to go and harvest free range protein, um,
from our forest environments.
So the first point is under licensed supervision.
What's also really important, uh,
for organizations like fish
and Game for Game Bird hunting in New Zealand
and large game hunting in New Zealand is for the ability
for us to bring on a new generation
of legitimate safe firearms users.
For that we need a pragmatic, uh, uh, restrictions
or management approaches for our clubs and rangers.
Um, and also for us to enable juniors
to come onto being licensed our firearms unit users as well.
So we are pleased that Bill retains the ability
for unlicensed persons to use firearms
and in direct supervision of a holder.
Our experience is that that works really well.
This is how new and junior hunters are mentored.
We know this, um, from sponsoring the largest youth shooting
competition in New Zealand,
which is a secondary skills play
target shooting competition.
Um, we ask the committee to ensure
that the provisions are really clear
and enable this, um, activity to continue.
Um, the changes also in the status of a firearm
by ordering counsel clauses 3 6 3
and 3 6 4 would allow semi-automatic
and pump action shotguns, for instance,
to be re reclassified as restricted items
by an order in counsel.
Following only ministerial consultation
with the regulator and police.
There's no public process involved.
Game bird hunters regulate use these firearms
and they're lawful widely held tools.
We're not asking for reclassification power to be removed,
but changes of this significance should require public
consultation and proper legislative scrutiny in relation
to registration of agency firearms.
This bill requires organizationally owned firearms held
by agencies like fish and game government departments
and councils for pest control to be registered
to individual employees.
However, firearms are used by multiple staff
and the named employee actually has no real
oversight over a work tool.
Staff are understandably reluctant
to register work firearms in their own name.
We submit that agency owned firearms should be registerable
to the organization with a record
of authorized users providing greater clarity
and accountability costs.
We like, we would like to see that license fees are kept
as low as practical to encourage compliance.
If fees become prohibitive,
some holders will simply drop off the register,
taking their firearms with them outside the system.
This is a public safety risk.
We support fees that are fair
and reviewed every five years in line with CPI,
but ask the committee to ensure a cost recovery does not
undermine compliance.
The bill retains the offense of being in control
of a firearm while incapacitated by alcohol and drugs.
But the threshold is entirely subjective,
making enforcement incredibly difficult.
We submit that defined blood alcohol levels should also
apply as it does for vehicle drivers.
Both provisions can coexist,
but a numerical threshold gives enforcement officers an
objective practical tool.
Fish and game supports this bill.
The five matters we have raised are not objections.
They're practical gaps that deserve attention
before the bill has passed.
We're happy to work with officials on solutions.
Cool. Thank you. Can I ask this question?
Um, you, you started out about who has control of arm
and I presume that's when you were
doing your enforcement role.
Mm-hmm. Then you talked towards the end about agency.
Um, was I right on the first
and can you just explain what you mean?
Why you as an agency you would hold, um, certain firearms?
The easy one that pops to head is the control of birds
around our hatchery operations for argument's sake,
so they don't overly predate.
So this is your dock dock star, sorry.
This is your game fishing game. Star. Star, yes.
So you have an agency arrangement for that? Yes. Yeah.
And so, and also was,
was I right about the first one when your officers going
out duck shooting time?
Yeah. They remove a, uh, an arm.
You don't, and this,
the wild game shooters have also raised the same issue
as people coming in from overseas.
Is there an issue about who owns the
Oh, this would would be more in the terms
of we've detected an offense
and seizing the firearm as evidence of that offense.
Yeah. And then we have to hold it till the court process it
Runs. But at the moment the
law's a bit,
the legislation's a bit unclear about how you control it
because I know it's been raised in another submission.
But yeah, we have an a hoc ad hoc solution
with the firearm safety authority where we, uh, report
that seized these firearms
and we're holding them till the court
processes anyway. Okay.
Alright, cool. Um, I'll go to Mr. Uh Willis. Scott Willis.
Thank you both. Um, we heard previously that there's some,
a large burden placed on firearm owners
that a firearm owner.
I haven't seen that burden, but that's one question.
But the, the main one is really, um, what are your thoughts
that we've got an unusual situation with this bill where
that the ce of the,
the regulator is gonna be appointed by the minister.
This is outside of the usual practice,
But they haven't Talk about what have you.
What are your thoughts on, on this,
um, proposal in the bill?
We didn't actually submit on that. You didn't submit
It? No, no, but I
Do you have any thoughts?
No, it's not, we're going into the detail of submissions.
Right. Mr. Todd, uh, Simpson.
Hi, Todd Stevenson. I'm from Southland.
And um, you'll probably appreciate duck shooting.
It's very important, um, to my community down there.
But you raised the obviously, um, you're, you're overseeing,
um, yeah.
Uh, hunting and fishing. Um, obviously the use
of firearms does control, um, bird populations like ducks
and you had some concerns around, um,
semi-automatic shotguns, et cetera, being restricted.
What, what would be kind of the impact if there was
further restrictions on
It would think really hard and a lot longer to achieve.
And that, I mean, the current arm set requires it
to no more than five shots commensurate
to the chambering of your firearm.
So that enables hunters to successfully, um,
harvest a number of birds that come into their,
my mind in a, in a rapid and efficient and a humane way.
Um, if they're having to deal with wounded birds
or other issues and that, then yeah,
that won't enable the control
of the population if you look at it in that sense. Mm.
So it's also really useful.
It's a really important tool to be able to retain, uh,
for game animal management, um, in particular.
So if you think Canada geese, um,
you really need the ability to be able to, um,
rapidly fire in relation to those,
you know, management of those species.
Thank you. Good question. Right.
Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
Oh, thank you for that.
Um, in, in the same vein, um,
as you note at the moment the minister has the power
to make changes to the rule so they could, for example, um,
you know, allow more rounds than a semi-automatic
shotgun or less.
Now, do you think that that kind of power should sit
with the minister, um, to make those kinds
of significant changes about permitted firearms?
Or should we lock that in in the legislation
and have to come back to parliament if we wanna change that,
That would've fit with our changes to the status
and we would say at least there should be public
consultation on that
and it should be a legislative requirement.
Okay. Good. Thank you.
Just question for one,
one more round the clay bird shooting,
which you're saying we've all been to, you know,
secondary school type competitions as mps.
Um, what do you think, what are your issues with,
because obviously you think they're a great way for people
to learn how to use in a controlled environment.
What's your issue with the legislation as it's trained?
Um, if the age was up to 18, um, you basically,
You cut people out. Yeah.
You're applying everyone under that
Age. You supporting 16?
Yes. Yeah. Cool. Right.
Hey, thank you very much for your presentation.
That's very good. Thank you. Right.
Um, I'm going to ask, um,
Mr. Bishop from Cable Bay Pistol Club.
Good morning. Morning.
You've seen the format, so, uh,
we've got 10 minutes with you.
Yeah. Morning.
Thank you very much for this opportunity to,
um, present today.
I've, um, it's, I'm member of a smallest club.
I'm president. Um,
but we've been, yeah, um, we shoot primarily pistol,
but we do do or have done more on the rifle on the shotgun
over the years since the ban, not in 2019
that has dropped off or whatever.
'cause of the three gun and the multi gun side of events,
we primarily shoot, um,
or compete in the IPO, IPSC style,
which is more the actions style shooting.
Um, we train at full time, um,
and we give a lot of training on for that, that side.
And we fully support this, this bill going forward.
There's, um, there are obviously things
that need a little bit of work on
and that's what the, the submissions will all about.
There's, um, there are a couple of sides there that we've,
um, looked at The, the removal
of the police from the FSA
and as much as possible is a good move on our,
the way we look at it, the police have a job
as a regular, as enforcement.
And enforcement should not be the same
as the one doing the regulating.
They also get a, there's a problem I've had, um,
with some of 'em that we've dealt with over the years, that
the, especially in the senior officers,
their whole thinking is around
who they can put in the dock, who they can charge.
So instead of more of a working
and they, they've spel spent their whole career
chasing that one.
You know, that 5% of the population that do things
that they shouldn't, we are not in that crowd.
Pistol shooters and shooters on a whole are very honest
and we follow the rules as much as we can.
There's, when you look at the numbers,
it's a very low offense rate.
When you have a license
and I put it in my bill, we are checked daily.
If you have any connection with the police over a weekend
or anything along those overnight, the next day your name
comes up on, on a list
and they look through to see what their contact was.
So if you've had a license for 10 years, for 10 years,
every day, 306, so 3,650 days, you've done
what you're supposed to have been doing.
We're not done anything you shouldn't.
So we need people that understand that we are not in
that 5% that they normally deal with.
And I think they are just aware of it's, um,
tar on on that side.
So when you change that moves, uh, got the idea
of restricting the number of firearms, that's been,
I've seen a couple of comments on that.
That is, um, not logical.
Uh, firearms a tool
and depending on what you are trying to do at the time,
whether it's a hunting sport, long range shooting,
it's a different firearm for each type.
It's a bit like limiting a golf, golf over three clubs.
You only need a putter or wood or steel, you know,
and you, you tell out of the local golf club
and I expect you're gonna get hit with one of them.
This is the same for my competitions. I, I have are limited.
I have to take two now as a minimum
because the timeframes just don't do it.
The age side of things, we need to keep that open so
that the juniors can start shooting as early as possible.
Any teacher knows that the early you start the better it is
for training for any sort of education.
I've personally been, um, shot
with the junior teams from both Australia,
Philippines, and Thailand.
And they're very good shooters and they start very young.
So the skill factor is right there.
Um, we need to be able to pass our items,
um, around a little bit better, um, to pass, sorry.
So when, uh, armor has a club armor,
we have that side so we can have a short
Passover so we can loan the gun for a day
or week on that side.
To make that a little bit easier, it gives us a, we have,
um, armors normally carry club guns,
which is under a person's name
'cause there's no other way for like, the guys
before wanted to do the organization,
but it makes it very hard if
that armor can't make it that weekend.
And then you've, you've got your new
shooters got nothing to use.
The mags as a different endorsement Makes no sense.
A firearm's a firearm. So without having to have
that connected is you,
you got the endorsement for the pistol.
Why you need an endorsement for a magazine to make it work.
Makes no sense on that side.
So that's just on there when we're talking about, um,
extended mags, the, I noted in my submission,
uh, a standard mag for most pistols are
from 15 to 19.
So that's not extended. That's just the standard magazine.
We do have extended the ones I use a wee bit longer.
Um, the other side of things, we often hear the comments
that a lot of the shooting styles are not sports
'cause they're not in the Olympics or in the Commonwealths.
There was a lot of sports out there, ours included
that aren't Olympic sports.
The style that I shoot 105 countries shoot
it internationally.
So, and we have, well shoots,
the last one there was 1600 shooters at the well
Worlds in South Africa.
Okay. I'll just pause there to if you've got any questions.
Yeah, we've got lots of questions. Um, you ready?
Yeah, I'm ready. Um, Mr. Todd Sig, thank you.
And thank you for being here.
I was just interested in your comments.
Obviously you're talking about the, the fact that um,
to keep your pistol endorsement,
you gotta do 12 shoots a year
and you're suggesting, uh,
it doesn't seem unreasonable given Yeah.
You're basically pointing out that's actually quite a lot
to, to do in a year and with people's other commitments.
So can you just talk a little bit more about that
and then what we, what you think is a realistic number and,
and do you think there's a role maybe when you are obviously
first getting your endorsement to have more
and then maybe later on have a less number? Whatever you
That'd be fair.
It's, it is a very restricting on, on that side.
And when you look at, no one actually knows that I can talk
to of where the 12 came from other than once a month.
Yeah. But when that was first came out,
that was when there was no weekend work.
You know, come Friday night shops closed
and you had the families had the full weekend.
So to do one a month, not a big deal.
But now most people work weekends and it's very hard.
We've got a police officer in our club, um, he's been in for
a couple years, I think, but he's just en hand in his
pistol endorsement.
Um, 'cause he can't do the 12 'cause of the shift work.
And he has got a family. So the few weekends that he gets,
you know, the Sundays, it's, it's very
Long. How many, how many, how
many shoots would you have at
Cable Bank where you're
Eight? Uh, that
we, we shoot, we're actually one of the lucky clubs
where we managed to shoot all year.
Right. Um, but there's other clubs that are restricted
through forestry.
Um, 'cause the, with the Yeah. Fire risks pruning. So
What would they do a year?
Um, one Nelson Club at the moment.
I just heard they've, they're closed for six weeks.
Right. They're
Just my very quick supplement.
And just so people understand,
so clubs like yours wouldn't do shoots during the week or
Generally? N not
normally. There's, there's a few people that go
during the week, but primarily it's, it's weekends.
Yeah. Because most of us are working. It's that.
And so then you're just, you are thinking about a more
appropriate number would be like six or
Eight? Yes.
Okay. Yep. So
Thank you. Cool.
Um, in the absence, oh, the, um,
so you wanna remove the number of firearms.
There's multiple uses, the armorer, the agency, so Fish
and Game talked about the agency type of arrangement.
Yes. Is that what you were talking about with that
Armor? Yeah. Something similar
along those lines.
So for you could, all you'd need is a receipt book
to sit in the safe.
So you, you could track where it had gone. Yeah.
So Within amount it would just, yeah,
it would just be within their own club.
Yeah. Um, so that would give self it
Without, you can't do that.
No. Right. Okay.
Um, and your comment about endorsement of magazines, um,
presumably if you, if you go and buy two 70 Yep.
Um, you don't have to get, I don't have
to get an endorsement for a magazine,
but where the endorsement cut kicks
in, if it's more than five,
Is that, well, the, the numbers are getting on that side.
The, um, the rifles are not right up on, on that, that side.
'cause a lot of those magazines, it's the five
and we are not allowed anything bigger other,
unless we've got a P 10. Yeah.
So for what, for two 70 rifle? It's 10, right?
For a shotgun it's five. Yep.
And yeah, there are no magazines. Uh,
There's no magazines.
A shotgun course. No, no, I get
That. Well, they you did.
We had them, but they were banned.
So I'm trying to understand where the endorsement, uh,
obviously for a pistol, because obviously
It's, they're talking about doing an
endorsement for the pistol as well.
So the idea is that if we've got an endorsement
for the pistol, sorry, the magazine,
if you've got the endorsement for the firearm,
you should not need another one for a magazine.
But presumably, presumably the argument is if you assuming
that a figure of 10 is right for a two 70.
Right. If you, if you wanna go
and get a 20 mag for your two 70, you
Can't endorsement unless you've a pre endorsement. Yep.
So you don't have a problem with that though, do you? No.
And if you want to get a at the moment,
whether there's the 10 is right for a personal,
whether on Aboriginal 1720,
but if you want to get a magazine bigger for your,
your pistol, then you have to go and get an endorsement.
I don't think you should have
to have an endorsement full stop at all.
You've got the pistol, you've got the
endorsement for the firearm.
Yeah. That's a part to use that. But
What happens if it's outside?
Because if you assume the the cup is 10 for the pistol. Yep.
Or even 20, if someone goes
and gets not supporting Mag pistol, you don't think
that's should be subject to any control?
Uh, the pistol endorsement covers that.
I I believe it should cover that. That side. Okay.
Somewhat different. Alright.
Hey, that's really very helpful.
Are there any other, um, questions?
No, no, it's good. Hey, thanks for your time.
It's been helpful and thank you. Thank you very much.
Yeah, that's been great that you've come up. Cool.
Right. We're gonna carry on.
Is this, um, we're a little bit early, which is great.
Is Mr. Thurston here from No. Are you No.
From mental hunts. Terrible trust.
Are you coming back for this?
He's online. Oh, you're online. Okay. Right. Fantastic.
That
Just giving him in.
That was good. That was good.
Yeah. Mr. Thurston, are you available?
Yes. Can you hear me? Yeah, we can. Very clearly.
Hey, now, um, thank you for,
we're a little bit ahead of schedule, which is great.
Um, thank you for your submission.
Very interesting submission. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Okay. Um, please, we can leave bit of time
for questioning. That would be great.
Awesome. No, thank you.
Oh, there you are. We can see you now
Tell you.
All right. Okay. So thank you.
Thank you to all the members of the committee
for this opportunity to speak today.
Um, my name is Glen Thurston.
I'm presenting on behalf of Mental Hunts,
which is a charitable trust recently established
to build a positive educational
and preventative approach
to mental health within the New Zealand firearms community.
We established this, we established the trust due
to the rising concerns of
how many firearms license holders have stopped
seeking mental health support.
Licensed firearms owners are currently delaying
or avoiding seeking help for mental health challenges due
to fear, fear of judgment, stigma
and loss of trust in the police.
And the potential regulatory consequences.
Mental hunts was created to address this problem, one
that I personally was a victim of.
Mm-hmm. I personally had my firearms license unfairly
revoked in 2019 in October,
or for going to my GP for mental health support.
I've, I've seen firsthand the unempathetic approach
of the police, the effect it had on my own recovery,
the effect on my wife, my three daughters, my employer,
and my ability to do my job,
which at the time was working on a high country
sheep, beef, and deer farm.
By no means do we support
that every person deserves the right
to have a firearms regardless of their mental health.
But we do support that every person deserves the right
to seek mental health support without fear of punishment.
Taking away this ability
to seek help from law abiding members
of the New Zealand community is a dangerous position
for the government to stand alongside without any
preventative measures.
Just last week I received an OIAI requested from the police.
The data revealed that in the year 2025,
only 34 people were notified to the FSA
for mental health related concerns.
This number is very concerning
and potentially tells us
that people have already stopped seeking help
and action needs to be taken.
Now we all know that mental health research
with mental health research, the early intervention is one
of the strongest protective factors.
When people seek support, early out
outcomes improved dramatically.
Yet the current firearms legislation
with its rush changes has now created one
of the biggest barriers for everyday New Zealanders
to seek mental health support.
The current, the current vetting system has been built
to be one of the toughest in the world designed
to keep New Zealanders safe,
but it fails to pro protect the very ones.
It is vetting the hunter, the farmer, the butcher,
the pest controller, the sporting shooter, the collector,
the husband, the wife,
the everyday law abiding community member of New Zealand.
Our fear is that in the next five to 10 years
of people not seeking help early,
we're gonna have a spike in suicides.
Not because of the use of firearms, but rather
because of the fear to seek help.
Due to the barrier that has been created
during a rush legislation change in 2019,
this then becomes a major flaw in the vetting system,
which is supposed to keep every New Zealander safe.
This is why mental hunt supports extending the mental health
related license suspension from three months to 12 months.
And the removal of police
and the establishment of an independent firearms regulator.
It is critical that a suspension must feel like a protective
pause and not a pathway to punishment by revocation.
If responsible license holders believe seeking help
automatically leads to long-term loss of privileges,
many will delay treatment that creates greater risk
for individuals and communities alike.
Mental Hunts advocates for a recovery focused approach
that we clinically assessed
as safe allows individuals under temporary suspension
to maintain involvement in hunting
under appropriate supervision.
This maintains safety controls while supporting mental
wellbeing and recovery.
In closing, yes, firearms ownership
and poor mental health is delicate,
but with careful consideration, good education,
we believe there is a place for both side by side.
In many circumstances, mental hunts believes that
this bill presents an opportunity
to strengthen public safety, encourage early help seeking,
reduce stigma and rebuild trust in the regulator.
A regulatory framework grounded in wellbeing, recovery
and support will produce better outcomes for individuals
and families and communities.
I thank you for your time and I do welcome
any questions you might have.
Righto. I've got the first question from
Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Oh, thank you Glen. Thank you for submission
and also talking about your own experience.
'cause uh, uh, that's really important.
You've obviously got firsthand experience,
so I just wanna understand, so I'm clear,
obviously we're talking about in this bill extending, um,
this kind of, uh, suspension option to 12 months
and then possibly, um, longer if someone's, um, dealing
with mental health issue.
So what do you think the, yeah,
what do you think that that will mean?
Do you think that will support, um, people seeking mental,
mental health and oh, support
and do you think that will actually lead to better outcomes?
What's your thoughts on that?
Yeah, absolutely. I, I feel it will
because at the moment, you know,
you're treated like a criminal.
If you are having a license to revoked
for mental health reasons, it's, it's a, you know,
you're essentially a criminal.
If you touch a firearms, if you're on suspension
and you can still use a firearms, you're not a criminal,
but it's also allowing that person the time to look
after themselves as it is right now,
you actually only have 28 days to respond to the authority
or you are revoked end of story.
But then once you respond, then you have another 60 days
to get your case out.
That's taking 90 days three months away from that person
to focus on themselves while they deal with trying
to manage, keeping their firearms to be a farmer,
to be a pest controller or to feed their family
or whatever it is that they do.
The enjoyment of getting in nature, you know,
so I do believe extending that time so
that they can actually focus on themselves rather than
paperwork and bureaucracy.
I think, I think there needs
to be more empathy towards supporting the person
through the process and helping 'em get the help they need
rather than punishing the person for and,
and rushing it in 60 days and saying we need to take it.
Uh, just one quick follow up, I mean, do you have any,
how hard are you,
I'm assuming you might still be in rural New Zealand.
Yeah. Um, just even seeking mental health support.
Have you seen any barriers there?
In many ways, yeah. It's, it stigma's the biggest one.
Um, but this, this barrier right now is the biggest one I'm
seeing and I get a lot of people contacting me on
and fearing to go to the doctor.
I mean, I've got PE people that are coming to me
that partners are going through cancer and,
and are potentially gonna pass away.
They're struggling and they've been offered free counseling
that are so scared to go
because they're gonna lose their livelihood.
And I'm like, no, just go.
You are, you know, you're not a threat to society.
This is the misconception.
We've also got the problem with gps that, you know,
they don't actually understand what they're meant
to be doing, so there's a lot of risk adversity going on.
So this is where I talk about education as being a big part
of what needs to be brought forward, something
that we are personally working on anyway for our community.
But there's a lot of education needs to be done with police
and with health practitioners.
There's a big, there's a lot of rabbit holes.
Just, just tos on that before I go over here.
The, um, you are supportive of the change is,
are you suggesting there are other changes we need to make
to the legislation or you're just making the point
that you support the change 12 months
and that the regulator needs to be more,
to take a more em empathetic approach to it?
Is that what you're suggesting in your submission?
Yes, definitely. And, and, and the separation from police.
Because at the moment, as we know, there's, there's a lot
of loss of trust in the police
and while that's there, people aren't
gonna go to the authorities.
Right. Last question from Mr. Scott, uh, Willis.
Thank you Glen. And I note
that you support maintaining the application
age of 16 years.
And I, I think I agree with you
that it does help develop discipline,
patients respect and all, all of that.
Um, and it's a good way to bring people into the space.
What are your thoughts on the idea of a learner license
that we've has been discussed?
Um, I, I'm not opposed to it,
but I guess it all depends on what sort of restrictions
that learner license holds.
Um, but yeah, yeah, potentially for a couple
of years I can't see a problem with that.
Um, 'cause usually when people are going out at that age,
they're, they're generally with their parents,
they're out spotlighting shooting rabbits.
Um, you know, I see the importance of it,
especially in this digital world.
It gets the kids, it gets the young people away from
that digital world, which is causing
so many issues in this society.
Um, when I had my license revoked,
my kids no longer went out with me.
I've, I've had a few issues with my own kids
and I always wonder, was my license revocation a part of
that process in redirecting the course of their life?
So I think it's really important to be able
to get children out with parents and,
and without their, their friends to be able
to hunt at a young age.
Um, yeah.
Alright. Hey, thank you.
You submission this morning. Uh, very helpful
And doing your bit to address stigma. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Now, uh, Mr.
Gallup from the Council of Licensed Owners,
very weighty submission.
Thank you.
Good morning select committee. Uh, I am, uh, Brad Gallup.
I'm the chair of Kofo. Uh, I have, uh, Bridget Morton,
who is the Kofo Council, uh, for, from Frank Ogilvy
and Hug Devereux Mac, who is our spokesperson.
Kofo strongly supports the intent of the arms bill
and would like to thank the Ministry of Justice
for attempting to produce a comprehensive,
simplified, and achievable bill.
Overall, this bill remains based on the Arms Amendment Act,
and has considerably,
or still has considerably over complicated sections,
which still need to be addressed.
This bill needs to ensure the tenant
of innocent until proven guilty.
That is fundamental.
And that licensed firearms holders,
once granted a license have been proven
to be fit and proper.
The bill should be consistent and concentrate on safe
and appropriate application firearms use
and not the perceived unsubstantiated threats or propaganda.
The transfer of the regulatory powers from the Commissioner
of Police to the Firearm Safety Authority
as a separate organization is supported,
but needs to be a separate legal entity
to ensure distinct separation of powers
between the regulator
and the law enforcement of the New Zealand police.
The continued perception
that the registry will magically solve gun crime
despite worldwide evidence to the contrary, will continue
to be a bureaucratic burden
around New Zealand's taxpayer's net KOFO has
provided a comprehensive objective
and practically based submission
to assist the committee in addressing some of these issues.
The KOFO submission has provided recommendations
and wording suggestions to ensure greater consistency
and practical safe application of the legislation.
Kofa looks forward to seeing this becoming an act
that promotes safety
and allows for practical regulation
of the firearms across New Zealand.
And that more firearms license holders, uh, will make
New Zealand safer because they become part
of the regulatory authority.
Uh, does the committee have any questions for
Casa? Right. Cool.
No. Great. Right.
We'll start with Mr. Todd Stevenson. So
Just, yeah, let's dig in on some of the issues.
Obviously one of the changes this bill makes is trying
to China more clearly separate the enforcer, uh,
the police enforcing the laws and the regulator.
Just again, uh, interested in your thoughts on that.
Does it go far enough? Is it a move in the right direction?
Uh, so, uh, generally it does.
The issue becomes a distilled part of the police from a, uh,
from a budgetary perspective.
So therefore there is, uh, some concerns
around the practical application of the backing functions
of the firearm safety authority and
therefore the influence
that the New Zealand police has on the authority.
I think also, just from a technical point of view, uh,
we've detailed the fact that essentially
as the biller's version at the moment, the arms officers,
the people that are on the frontline interacting
with licensed firearm owners are
to some extent just rebadged members of the police.
And so I think it's really important, uh, for trust
and confidence that actually there is that true separation
because that is where the licensed community has come up
against issues is interacting with those arms offices.
And just a quick follow up, just
so we're we're clear obviously.
Yep. Um, you go through a process, you apply to a proper,
uh, I'm assuming cofa though doesn't have any problem
with the regulator when they're, um, going
to license someone, uh, ensuring that they, you know,
do the proper checks on people, actually work
with the police to make sure that there's any
relevant background information, et cetera.
Yeah, no, that is the absolute role of the regulator.
Yeah. Uh, and so, so we, we, we, um, support
That. So long as that relationship
can work, it'll, yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. We'll go to honor honorable,
uh, Jean Anderson. Oh,
Thank you very much. And
thank you for your submission.
Um, just listening to, to the comments you made now, would,
would it be fair to say that there's a level of mistrust
or not full trust between, uh,
licensed firearm owners and the police?
Uh, at the moment, yes.
Uh, there is, uh, been significant evidence, uh,
from the police themselves that show that they have, uh,
that the members of the firearms community have lost
that trust and confidence in their ability
to be able to manage firearms.
And, and can you give me some examples of,
of how that's occurred?
So we put out an annual trust
and confidence survey each year, if not only our members,
but our reaches around 200,000 licensed firearms owners.
Those consistently have shown, well,
they had a slight uptick in the last 12 months going from
about a one to a 1.4 out of 10.
Um, though the lack of trust is basically to do
with the licensed firearms owners being treated
as potential criminals rather than law abiding people,
police turning up to their doors armed rather than having a
call and treating them
as though they're willing to have a conversation.
Those are things that have really
damaged the trust and confidence.
And, and do you think the measures within this bill go far
enough to address the concerns
that your members have raised with you
Overall? Yes.
Uh, there are still some issues around the bureaucracy
that has been created by the FSA, um,
that have overly complicated firearms license holders
to be able to, uh, both renew their license, uh,
and also transact on a day-to-day basis with the ESA.
Alright, thank you. Um, I'm gonna go to Mr. Scott Willis.
Thank you. Um, could you explain what issues you have
with the firearms registry and,
and just to say, I'm also a licensed firearms owner
and even who problems with the police,
I'm very pleased that they've got a registry.
Uh, yeah. Okay. So personally, um, I, uh,
am a licensed firearms holder,
obviously and have collections.
Um, the issue we have is not
with the licensed firearms holders, the ability to be able
to, um, register their firearms.
Uh, the issue is, is that the fact that there is a,
a mistrust within the firearms community around, uh,
the ability for the police at the moment to, uh, keep
that information safe
and that the fact that there are over half a million
firearms, uh, that are either, um, illegal
or partially illegal, um,
that have no regulatory, um, authority.
So that's still a large ability
for criminals to have firearms.
Um, the therefore don't, um, be part of the registry.
Um, there's also the fact that, uh, we have a,
the large trust in police in maintaining a data security
and OIA recently showed
that there were 61 complaints against police,
unauthorized use of databases and breach of privacy
and confidential reality in 2024.
And there were already errors within the register.
I recently discovered that a firearm I had registered when
transferring it to my father was registered under the wrong
serial number, despite the fact
that I had clearly told him I
had records of it being incorrect.
If that's happening in the early stages
before we have online transfers, that's going to magnify
and the register will be incorrect.
So supplementary, I,
I guess there will always be some blips in the registry
that's to be expected and unfortunate,
but resolvable, do you think that, um,
you have some responsibility as well for building
that trust in that acceptance?
That we need better systems
for public safety in our firearms?
I, I think the importance here is actually looking
to the evidence of registry
and we have considerable evidence looks for overseas that
where they have got registries established
and they've been wildly more expensive than what,
um, was budgeted for.
They've been much more Buddhism in terms of the bureaucracy
behind it, so that the cost and burden on the taxpayer
and there have not been any evidence of increases in safety.
So when you take that side of it,
and that's detailed in our submission, uh, if you take
that side of it and you then put aside, you know, the blips
or the questions about confidentiality
or the concerns from license firearm owners about security,
the registry doesn't add up as a measure
to reduce illegal firearm use in our community.
Okay. Can I return to your very first comment,
which is about, um, innocence until proven guilty?
Now yes. Number
of people have raised this in their submissions and, um,
and, uh, accept, accept the principle, right?
Because New Zealand's law is, works on the principle
of your, um, innocent proven, right.
I suppose the, the bit I'm trying to ascertain
or get a better view on,
because Legisl doing legislation's a very clumsy way
of doing something that requires a bit of nuance.
And the nuance is in many cases this is
about a precautionary approach.
Someone might be suffering from mental health issues,
someone might be doing something online that does, uh,
would may indicate something.
So there's always a judgment call in it.
And, um, so what I'm just trying to understand from you is
the way it's couched in the legislation, uh,
do you think that it doesn't give enough, uh,
discretion and it ultimately comes down to the person coming
to your house or whatever, right.
Do you think it doesn't give you the person enough
discretion or it doesn't give
that person when they turn up at your house
with enough guidelines?
Um, so that's the bit I'm trying to really,
because that's the thing we've gotta
deal with in this committee, right?
So, so there's two parts to this.
So the first one, um, as a non-licensed firearms holder,
you have more rights and privileges under the law than you
do as a firearms license holder.
So that requires a, the law enforcement to have,
unless there is, uh,
force majeure requirements to have a warrant.
Now, under the current law
and parts of the proposed law is
that New Zealand police can enter your home without a
warrant and without what many
of licensed foreign holders conceived a, uh, req a
required reason to then inspect
or, um, see other parts of your license.
Uh, and those firearms that a person
who would illegally have their firearms license, um, have.
So, so that is part of our concern is
that license firearms holders have left rights
and privileges than people who were legally have firearms.
And when they, and I understand now,
that's good, they given that clarity.
So when they, because this is under the new regime,
this will be only the license, the re reg
regulator whose only responsibility is about the we
that guns that people might have, right?
So, um, you are concerned there's not
no, just it's an, a carte blanche approach of them.
They can turn up at any time, any, uh, at your home
and say, I need to inspect you, your, your rifles.
Is that correct or is there rules around it?
There is some rules around it,
but it is, uh, very much that they can turn up with various,
uh, minimal threshold to, to make.
And we have seen that being used particularly, uh,
in the last five years as
an action against licensed firearm owners.
And that has been, you know, overturned
in the courts a number of times.
Um, it's been proven that they have done so
as a, as a means of kind of,
And in many cases, can you, uh, have there been proven,
Um, we can send that through to you, we can send you
through the, the case details. Okay.
So that would be helpful. But you, you get
what the committee's gotta deal with, right?
Because there will be time that it may be appropriate
that people turn up, uh, from the regulator,
but whether we got the balance right, that's a bit that, um,
I'm really trying to nudge here, right? So at
The moment, um, COFO doesn't
believe that balance is correct.
Um, there is a search
and seizure act which re um, which enables, uh,
law enforcement, uh, to, uh, go to a premise
or to a person, uh, where there is an immediate threat.
Um, however, from a, uh,
firearms bill from including the current one,
there is the ability for law enforcement to do that without,
uh, an immediate threat.
And that that creates a situation where there is a,
a large number of the community that feel threatened.
Okay. Uh, around, so what would you do their reaction if
You were sitting in that position here?
What, what would you be advising?
I'm trying to get right down, right?
Mm-hmm. We would be increasing the notification
requirements, uh, because we understand what
Does that mean? Sorry. So
giving, um, in terms of
how much time you require
before you're going to enter the premises, um,
to inspect if they've got a concern about secure storage,
um, or the thresholds for when they may do so,
it can't be just, uh, you know, it should be similar
to the fact that they think something
Criminal going in to check whether
someone's got a proper gun safe.
But what about the occasion that there's a,
a perceived threat about that individual? Well,
I think that it any threat to safety that makes sense,
but that needs to be actually a qualified threat,
not just a, a wider concern.
I think also that when you're thinking about this particular
premise of innocent and proof guilty, it's not just
that search concern, it's actually throughout the act.
So if you look at clause 2, 5 3, a person in a, um,
public place, um, carrying a firearm has to prove
that they've got a lawful purpose for carrying that firearm
despite being licensed.
If you take the analogy and put it against cars,
if you are driving a car with a driver's license,
you don't have to prove that you've got a lawful purpose
for driving from A to B.
And so there's no, there's that, um, premise
that has been switched in the law as well,
that suddenly they've got to not just prove
that they're licensed fire owners
and that they've got their secure storage,
which are requirements, they've also gotta prove
they've got also a lawful purpose.
I think that the key here is the burden of proof.
Most, under most laws, the burden of proof is on the crown
to prove that they are not lawful Yeah.
In the way the current arms bill and, uh,
and the previous acts are, it is the onus
of the licensed firearm holder to prove
that they are lawfully allowed to be carrying a firearm.
Okay. So what, and That is a significant
What would be helpful. See,
I can get, if someone wants to come
and inspect your safe,
then they have to give you a proper notice.
I get that. What, what,
that's probably not the situation we're worrying about.
The situation is that there's aist either
mental health Yeah.
Um, something, some people doing something online, I, um,
I hear about carrying a,
a rifle go hunting trip or whatever.
That's a definition.
What I'd quite like you to do is think through
what you think would be more appropriate
in those C circumstances
because there is a, even now, please have the opportunity
to, on suspicion to go and do stuff, right?
Yeah. It's a long-winded process,
but they still have to do it.
So it'd be interesting to see what powers you think the
and win degree on.
The degree of severity around the issue be.
We be welcome to get your ideas on that. Okay.
We're more than happy to, um,
do a supplemental submission on
that particular subject. Thank you.
Okay. Now, um, we've, uh,
Mr. Todd Stevenson had another question.
Sorry, uh, Duncan, uh, honorable Dun Duncan weep after
Oh, thank you. Look,
we hit the minister in the other day
and I know she's been, um, essentially saying
that she favors the reintroduction of semi-automatic weapons
for this three gun sport where you, um, go around
with a pistol, a shotgun, and a semi-automatic weapon.
I, I don't wanna ask about the technicalities
of how she's gonna do that.
I guess I wanna ask whether you agree with that
and why you think the reintroduction of semi-automatic
rifles or the broadening of the use of semi-automatic rifles
is appropriate for this particular sport?
Um, great question. Thank you.
Um, as a member of that sport, uh, there's two parts.
Firstly, um, semi-automatics
aren't going to be rein induced.
They're already part of the community,
but under limited circumstances.
And there, um, and there's, there's reasons for that and,
and we all accept those.
Uh, the issue though is that we have other sports, uh,
and requirements that then would allow those semi automatic
rifles to be, uh, under a similar regime is, uh,
pistols in New Zealand to be able
to be safely used in competitions,
which then allow New Zealanders to commit, commit, uh,
sorry, compete on the international stage
as a legitimate international sport.
So just, uh, we've got,
'cause I that you want to
engage in this sport is, I guess obvious.
Um, I guess in terms of the balancing, we've got these,
you know, weapons which have one use, which is
as an essentially as an assault rifle.
What is it that means that as a society,
which strike a balance, which
increases the availability of these weapons?
What's the social good?
Uh, well firstly, um,
semi-automatic firearms are not self rifles.
And as a, uh, member of the armed forces, um,
I'd like to make that very clear.
Uh, the, uh, New Zealand has been using, uh, for example,
pistols and, uh, pistols have been part of the,
the law since 1930s.
And we have proven across the, uh, across New Zealand
that the safe use of pistols can be well
regulated and well used.
And we would see that the use
and regulation of semi-automatic firearms in this act,
in this act would be the same as those the pistols.
And that would allow those members of society
who are engaged in this sport to be able to be properly, uh,
used for the sport and also to be properly regulated.
So you, I mean the question was
what what's the social good?
What's the balance? I guess, without putting words into your
mouth, you, your members enjoy
engaging in this three gun event
and that's reason to introduce make more widely available,
uh, these semi-automatic weapons. Is that the guts of it?
So there's a social benefit in all sports.
This is another type of sport.
It is also a highly regulated sport
within a club environment.
So there's a social benefit
for being within a club environment, a highly regulated one.
And as Brad has pointed out within the TAL New Zealand
environment, you've shown the evidence
that it can be done in a safe way
that leads to a social benefit.
Alright. Hey, thank you very much.
Now I think we've got Mr.
Dere Mack who's got, we've got him just for five minutes.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. Appreciate
Your time. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Submission.
And you might come back on that
and obviously don't come back
and say you don't need anything
unless you've got some thoughts on that.
Yeah, no, you understand that nuance. Yeah.
We would appreciate the to write
a supplementary submission. Thank you.
Right. Um, Mr. Devereux,
Thank you very much. So
first off, I want to thank the committee
for taking the time to hear from licensed firearms owners,
especially who are the committee
or the community most affected by the arms back changes,
though as rightly stated by the anti-gun lobby earlier, many
of us remain unaware that this change is even happening
because it operate, many of us operate outside
of the club environment.
Now I support this bill commend the government
for finally addressing the rushed
and ineffective law changes made in 2019.
Um, and my submission today is informed
by almost two decades of work to improve firearm safety
and licensing in New Zealand.
I believe the law should be fair, practical,
evidence led and enforceable.
I'd like to highlight three key points then
to answer any questions you might have.
The first is to update numbers in point 13
of my submission In September, 2024,
offices reportedly trolled
through 360,000 gun sales from 39 stores.
The result was one conviction for straw purchasing
between 2022 and 2024.
From dedicated operations to fineness,
that represents an average straw buying conviction rate
of 0.00014% per year.
To put that into perspective,
'cause it's a small number, the number
of sworn police officers convicted of a crime
for the same period was approximately 690 times higher.
And I must ask, is that an efficient use of resources?
My second point is
that increasing the restrictions on law abiding firearms
owners or adding layers of Swiss cheese,
as others have commented to reduce gun violence,
is a flawed ideology.
Conviction rates for non-driving related events from
20 20 19 to 2024 averaged at 0.095%
of licensed firearms owners.
And post 2019,
we have seen gun crime increasing despite the increased
regulations placed upon our community.
Therefore, further restrictions on licensed owners will have
negligible improvements to public safety
and will have no effect on criminals who operate
outside of the arms act.
Additional layers of cheese could be placed
around criminals, however, to make communities safer.
And my final point is that section 69 2 C
and 69 3 B from the fit
and proper criteria should be removed
as the quote any other matter the chief executive deems
appropriate creates ambiguity
and has been used by police in the past
to bully licensed firearms owners, force them
to incur legal costs in order to challenge it.
We deserve to know what rules we are playing by
and have them clearly laid out for order to follow
and especially ensure that they are free from personal bias
and discrimination against marginal communities.
I take any questions you might have. Thank you.
Right, thank you. Um, what's that reference?
Any other matters? Just remind
Me. Uh, section
69 2 C and 69 3 B.
It exists in the current, but it says
police rather executive. Right.
Any questions? Yeah. Oh, sorry.
Uh, honor board Jenny Anderson.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Uh, thank you for your submission.
Um, just wanting to know, um, from your experience,
do you participate in these a three gun type events?
And just for public information, can you give us, um,
a bit more information on, on why these a need to,
to have those, uh, whatever we call them,
prohibited weapons, um, for international competition?
Yeah, so I don't particularly participate in the three gun
competition and that is
because getting a pistol license is really difficult
and I haven't had the, the capability
of doing that recently.
Um, so I guess that's my limited knowledge there.
The reason I would support it is
because it is a law abiding sport in New Zealand.
Uh, it's an international competition
and I don't believe that we should restrict the, like,
rights of law abiding people to try
and prevent criminals from doing crime.
I think the whole purpose of criminals is
they operate outside of the law.
Right. Uh, last Just one supplementary, sorry.
Um, and do you think that the bill,
what we are considering now facilitates um, more easily um,
an opportunity for people to participate in three gun events
with these legislative changes?
I think it opens the door for people
to compete in the chosen sport of their,
the sport they desire.
Okay. Very quickly, last question from just
On the Swiss cheese model
'cause it's actually been in a few ions this morning.
Just talk us through what is the problem with that?
So the problem with the presented Swiss cheese model Yeah.
Um, is that it says in order to prevent, uh,
well it treats all people as potential criminals
and then getting access,
but it also forgets the fact
that there are already a significant number
of cheese layers in there already
and it's un affecting, it's not affecting criminals.
Um, so for example, the registry, the safe storage,
the semi-auto ban so-called,
although it doesn't really exist, those have not stopped
gun crime going up.
So introducing things like banning 95% of firearms
with a bolt action ban, for example,
with detachable magazines.
That's not gonna stop a criminal using it.
However, things we could introduce are better searches
for firearms at the ports to prevent criminal access.
You could look at things like non concurrent sentencing
to sort of punish criminals
or dissuade them from going there.
There are layers of cheese that we could put,
but it's not on our community, it's on those
who are actually doing the crime.
Okay. Thank you very
much for your submission this morning.
Right. Thank you. Thank you. Um, now I'm gonna ask Mr.
Ridden and Moore, uh, are you on your own?
I enjoy. Well that's disappointing.
Now you're from the New Zealand Airports
Association, interest in submission. Yeah.
Oh, thank you. Um, we're from,
we should not take up too much of the committee's time
and uh, which is always a good thing.
Um, my name's Steve Brighton, I'm the policy director
of NZ Airports.
Um, I'll very briefly cover off, uh, what,
what I'm gonna say here for the people
who haven't read our submission.
Um, NZ airports represents 49 airports, um,
including all the ones
where you can land a passenger plane and take off.
Um, we've got only one area of concern with the bill
and that is enabling specialized firearms training take
place under the business license category.
Um, as airports we operate in a fairly unique environment,
lots of very expensive equipment.
Um, we also operate, it's just
so different from pest control
and things like that out in the wild
or in, in the more we're a buildup inver
environment around an airport.
Um, we have obligations under aviation safety regulations
to control wildlife.
And sometimes that is done, that is done by
airport employees
and sometimes it involves the use of firearms, uh,
lethal control, uh, obviously what we wish that activity
to take place as safety as possible.
And we have obligations under Health
and Safety Work Act to make sure that that occurs.
So to be sure airports want to have access
to specialized firearms training for your employees.
The bill is drafted does not make that clear
that the business license category would enable that.
Um, there's also a presumption,
the bill in various different parts,
I'm not gonna name them, um,
they say the business will be conducted at one address
listed at the time of application.
And there's also language in the bill
regarding occasionally be carried out in another location.
And that doesn't give sort of this certainty
for a firearms trainer to say, yes, I can travel
to Hamilton Airport or Auckland Airport
or wherever on a certain day.
And it's the ability for that uncertainty
that connect is a chilling effect on the specialist firearms
trainers we would like to see at airports.
Any airports wanna do it
to improve the safety of the entire operation.
Really, it that's what we wanted to see.
So just, just be clear, look at the moment, you, you,
you have people that go out to various airports,
you 49 airports, do they generally go round a whole lot
of airports or they just, if you go
to Auckland Airport for instance mm-hmm.
Um, I presume they've got their own people.
If people Auckland airport in terms of, uh, shooting birds
or whatever Yeah, but if you went to
or whatever, they probably don't have the capability
that'd hire someone to do it. No,
No. And and
Kyra wouldn't have any need under, uh, regulations,
aviation regulations to do that.
It's only certificated airports, which are the larger ones
where you are operating, uh, regular passenger transport.
So what I'm getting at in the legislation,
you wanna make sure this is a permitted activity as part
of the business activity at the airport,
and you wanna have flexibility either for the airport
to do itself to go and control bird life
or whatever it might be, or they have to around the airport
or move around to hold different airports. Sorry.
No, no. Um, no, I don't think there's anything, the bill
that would stop an airport going out
and doing lethal control, now the employee employees who do
that are licensed firearms
or would've a firearms license right now
and they will use either their own personal firearms stored
at the airport or the airport's firearms
on a, on a bigger Right. You know,
I think the issue Mr. Chair
Is around the training, isn't it?
Yeah. It's about having somebody
who can be a licensed firearms trainer being able
to operate as that
as a legitimate business under the business licensing.
Right. Okay. And also to be able to travel with the guns
and, and what the guns that airports use are, um,
the 22 GRM fires,
there's no cent fire rifles used or shotguns.
Okay. And so as the specialist trainer,
and you might be trying to train a team of 10 people,
not all of 10 people are going out there at once,
but airports operate 24 7.
So you want to be able to travel, say for example,
and I'm making these numbers up with 8 cent fire, eight,
sorry, rim fire rifles and eight shotguns.
So you can have everybody handling the weapons
during the training sessions.
And That's carrying, that's, that's a firearms
that need to be transported safely and still safely.
No, we, I'm just glad we've got, um, sorry, question,
but good to have that case.
No, no, yeah. Was there a question? Right.
Any other, um, got one from Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks Chair. Um, and On the Wnu airport, no doubt.
Thanks for the submission.
Um, just a question around what you see as the amendment.
Do you see that, uh, the, the amendment would need
to just cover the circumstance
that you are talking about in terms of airports
or have you got any other examples where you think
that this, uh, change would also be relevant?
Um, I did apply my mind to that a little bit this morning
that I thought that may be Dock Wildlife controllers
or, you know, regional councils pest control staff.
Yeah. They may have a niche work,
but I cannot speak on behalf.
Yeah. Those organizations, um, got New Zealand Fish
and Game talk about similar.
Yeah. Yeah. So it, it depends how far you go down
that route of moving away from
what I would've thought was the old idea
of you learn about firearms from your parents or cousins
or whatever to becoming more professional,
especially in those employment situations
where we would like to be able to train people
to a high standard for our employment obligations.
Right. Good. Thank you Mr. Rinn.
Um, very good submission that clarity.
Right now we're going to go, uh, to Gun
Gun nz Safe and New Zealand Desal
'cause Association with Cara Branch.
Um, and personally, are you together
or, well, how's it doing?
I'm sort of, are you doing both? Both.
Covering both and, sorry, I haven't got your name. Stuart
Hydes. Stuart
Hydes Hydes.
So you're representing which one or both? Both. Both.
Okay, cool. We've got, we've got a bit of time, so great.
Cool. To clarify that, how long have I got? 10 minutes?
Yeah. Cool. So first of all,
thank you very much for this opportunity.
Uh, we, you've obviously read our submissions.
Um, so, uh, our intention here today is
to draw your attention to what
we believe is some key points.
And boy, do we not envy your task.
Um, so we wanna focus on some more background aspects
and to remind ourselves what good firearms law enables and
therefore why what we are doing here really matters.
There are two co two points.
We wanna focus on firearms for public good
and two countries we should be looking at to
as our peers rather than Australia
or the UK using prohibition of semi-automatics
as a comparative example.
I guess, um, my first question is,
or question to myself is why you
should be interested in listening to me.
Uh, as principal author of this submission,
my siblings wider family
and I are fairly representative of a great many
of New Zealand's firearm license holders and,
and people who are not represented in any
of our organizations.
We consider ourselves to be hardworking, tax paying,
grassroots, salt of the earth, kiwis,
the kind you can find from all walks of life,
the length and breadth of the country.
As youngsters, we did more than our fair share
of wild introduced species population management.
We are talking into the thousands of critters per year.
This has become a lifelong contribution to date, to date,
all at no cost to anybody else, not other taxpayers
or rate payers, not even the farmers upon whose
properties we often operate.
We believe firearms law reform continues not just
to be about the firearms themselves as it is also
about the way of life they enable for a significant,
legitimate and law abiding group of New Zealanders.
This is the Kiwi way of life.
Thomas Jefferson probably said an important point we want
to make best in his inaugural address
as US President on the 4th of March in 1801 when he said
all two will be in mind.
The sacred principle that though the will
of the majority is in all cases to prevail that will
to be rightful must be reasonable
that the minority possess their equal rights,
which equal laws must protect
and to violate would be oppression.
Firearm license holders are also just a,
just such a legitimate minority
and we believe we remain a,
a vitally important part of our society.
Collectively, we own billions of dollars
of specialist recreational assets, firearms themselves,
vehicles, boats, technology
and equipment, clothing, et cetera.
We spend into the hundreds of millions of dollars per annum
and we spend millions of year, hours per year in pursuit
of firearms related mainly recreational activities.
Being such a significant part of our society,
we believe we make a vital ongoing contribution
to the cultural, social, mental, physical, spiritual
and economic wellbeing of our country.
We are just under 5% of the population.
We are 10% of voters
and along with our friends, family, other supporters
and beneficiaries, we're at least 20% of the community
a much higher proportion than that
outside of our main centers.
For a country of our size, we have the greatest list
of exotic wild mammals and birds introduced by humans.
Apart from the even greater use of poisons, which none
of us want, the recreational
and vocational use
of firearms are without a doubt the single biggest thing
standing between ourselves
and our countryside being overrun
by wild introduced species.
We talked about keeping our spirit as a friend and as a free
and independent country
and our capability to defend our ourselves live.
And well, those
who don't learn from history are doomed to repeat it.
Ask anybody in the u the Ukraine r right
now why this is important.
We variously assist with population management of species,
including rabbits.
Heres ducks, geese, wallabies, muss, feral cats, pigs,
deer, shammy and tar.
This contribution strongly underpins our rural economy
as well as making a strong,
strong contribution towards protection
of our indigenous biodiversity.
We could compare ourselves with Norway who had a similar,
well actually a much worse tragedy
than we had in Christchurch.
If, if numbers of casualties are the measure.
This example is well documented in our submission, basically
nor Norway is New Zealand's closest peer
or close peer in terms
of firearms ownership ranked 16th in the world
as against New Zealand's 20th
for firearms ownership per capita
after the tragedy in which 77 people were killed back in
2011.
Instead of knee jerk law changes
that took the Norwegian government more than 10 years
before firearm laws became effective,
they brought in far fewer law changes
and did not ban semi-automatic center fire rifles being held
from being held by fi firearms license holders.
In our context in general, this occurred
because their firearms law changes were properly informed
and better reflected the the, the legitimate purpose
of such firearms within our society.
Within their society, Norway has taken a far more inclusive,
practical, and therefore widely beneficial approach towards
firearms law reform.
It's also noted they don't attempt to maintain a registry
of all privately held firearms.
Another example of a country
that threatened a knee jerk reaction but didn't is Sweden.
Very similar to New Zealand,
they are ranked 21st in the world
as against New Zealand's 20th.
So a v very similar number of firearms per capita
like Denmark and New Zealand.
And unlike particularly the the United Kingdom,
Sweden's strong hunting culture is deeply rooted
in egalitarian values.
Meaning hunting is accessible to, accessible to all
regardless of social class or wealth.
They had good laws similar to what we had in New Zealand.
Those laws had served them well. Uh, in recent years.
They, they had suffered a dramatic increase in firearms
related incidents in homicides.
These are acknowledged to be closely linked to gangs
and gun gang related criminality in February, 2025.
So that's just last year.
They suffered their worst mass shooting in modern history
resulting in the deaths of 11 people.
Of course, this ignited public outcry
and political pressure to curbs access
to semi-automatic centerfire rifles.
Strong statements were made.
The government announced intentions by late June, 2025.
So that's seven months ago.
The government announced sweeping reforms
and that were going to include the banning of,
of certain semi-automatics.
Um, and they have subsequently made a
U-turn and instead of banning semi-automatic rifles,
they have simply grandfathered existing permits
for using them for hunting.
I guess the key point about Sweden as an example,
is they have seen a dramatic reduction in firearms related
incidents in homicides,
but it hasn't been achieved by a lot firearms law reforms.
It's they combat crime through proactive policing,
targeted interventions in gang dominated areas
and social prevention strategies which have contributed
to a recent, dramatic recent decline in shootings.
Again, it's noted that they don't maintain a registry
of privately held forums.
Uh, so in conclusion, thanks very much
for giving us the opportunity to do this, to present to you
and for the work that you are doing
And we really hope that you
come up with some good outcomes.
Can I ask you a detailed question? Yep.
Uh, in your submission, I dunno whether you
this is the one Yeah, you're right.
We post a provision that requires any standard firearm
or part man manufactured by a firearms license holder.
Uh, this rule applies unnecessarily restrictions
to non-commercial low value activities.
Items such as bipods, cheek rises,
hand grip stocks, and other accessories.
Is that way it's been captured in the legislation.
Um, I see some nodding going on.
So we're not talking about, um, other bits.
Manufacturing sort of the barrel
or new pistol mechanisms, firing mechanisms.
It is covers anything to do with firearms. Okay, cool.
I've seen some nodding there. Okay. That's
The issue with the definition
of the word manufacture
as it currently stands. It needs to be
Clarifier. Right. Good.
So we're here at that point, um,
are you making a submission later on?
Mm-hmm. Yes. Right. Well we'll pick it up then. Okay.
Um, any other questions?
No, that's good submission. Thank you.
Um, thank you've been very useful. Uh, submissions Right.
Members we're gonna have a break
because we're well ahead of schedule.
Oh. So we will have a break now
until 10 pass, if that's okay.
You might see if we can get the ignorant people
on, on board.
Um, yeah. But we're gonna have a break. Yeah.
And then we'll come back. So members, did you hear that?
Can pass the letter. Okay. It's time. Thank you. Just
seems like it's been very constructive.
Yeah.
Alright. This is the Eggmont pistol.
I thought Eggmont was online. Yeah, they are.
Oh, cool ones. Yep.
Right. Bud order. Good. Thank you. A hand. You need a gavel.
I know. I need a gavel. Yeah, she's in order.
I gonna be back in the speakers
chair call.
Oh,
are you with us?
Yes. We're here. Right? Good. Mr.
Laley, we've got, uh, 10 minutes with you.
Um, and we've heard just be good if you left us some time
for some questions for yours.
Can you see me and hear me?
We can hear you, but we can't see you.
Oh, why can't you see me? And
It'd be preferably if we could see you.
Um, let's see. Oh, video. Hang on.
There's a button at the bottom. Wasn't good. Oh, very
Good. Right? Is that better?
Fantastic. Rip into it.
Okay. So I'm Dennis Lowy, secretary
of the Eggmont Pistol Club.
And the Eggmont Pistol Club has been in existence
for over 45 years and has an unblemished safety
and security record of using restricted firearms
for sporting purposes.
Our club commends the 2025 arms bill.
The bill's intent to provide for a greater protection
of public safety, uh,
to simplify regulatory equip requirements
and to improve compliance.
These are noble aims.
However, our club has concerns about elements in the arms
bill, which run contrary to these stated aims.
Particularly, we are concerned with those which failed
to simplify regulatory requirements.
We feel that a number
of definitions have introduced unnecessary
details and complications.
Our submission has highlighted a number of areas
where succinct and workable definitions can reduce the size
of the bill and achieve its ability to simplify
regulatory requirements.
To start with, the Eggmont Pistol Club recommends
that the definitions of restricted firearms
and restricted magazines be improved.
The facts are a firearm
with a detachable magazine can be reloaded rapidly.
A firearm with a fixed magazine cannot be reloaded rapidly.
Therefore, a firearm
with a fixed magazine should no longer be restricted
because its magazine capacity
because of its magazine capacity.
Even if that magazine capacity exceeds 10 rounds,
possession of a detachable magazine holding more than 10
rounds should be restricted.
Possession of a pistol with a semi-automatic revolver
or single shot should be restricted possession
of a semi-automatic rifle
or shotgun that takes a detachable magazine
should be restricted.
Thus, a restricted firearm is either a semi-automatic long
arm, which takes a detachable magazine or a pistol.
The Eggmont Pistol Club agrees that possession
of a restricted firearm requires an endorsed license,
firearms license, as well as registration of that firearm.
The bill introduces the definition
of large capacity pistol magazines.
That is pistol magazines holding more than 10 rounds.
This definition allows such a magazine to be held
by the possessor of an endorsed license,
but does not require the magazine
to be marked or registered.
Our club agrees that the marking
or registration of large capacity magazines is unnecessary.
The Eggmont Pistol Club sees no reason why the same rule
should not apply to all restricted magazines.
Therefore, possession
of a restricted magazine should only require an
endorsed firearms license.
The registration or numbering
of the magazine is unnecessary.
It should be sufficient for all large capacity magazines
to simply require an endorsed license to possess.
Thus, the Bill's definition
of a large capacity Pistol Magazine is redundant if it is
replaced by our proposed broader definition
of a restricted magazine.
And that's in our, um,
in our submission as well.
The small semi-auto pistol definition is unnecessary.
The definition of the term pistol under what is described
as a restricted firearm is sufficient.
In addition, the specified ammunition definition
is a flawed attempt to allow a sporting body
to prescribe what everyone else knows
to be pistol ammunition.
Keep it simple. Call it what it is,
and use the definition of pistol caliber ammunition
as defined in our submission.
The Eggmont Pistol Club also believes that
as pistol carbine conversion kits, which allow pistols
to be fired from the shoulder are permitted
so too should pistol caliber carine be allowed.
Section 1 8 3 2 of the bill, which describes the endorsement
for a member of a pistol club, should be simplified to read
that such endorsement holders may possess one
or more of the following items, A pistol,
a restricted magazine, a pistol caliber carbine,
a pistol carbine kit.
Our club has serious concerns about the absence
of recognition of the need to carry pistols
and other restricted items from home to the range and back.
There is no provision to allow this in the proposed bill,
nor in the current act or in the regulations.
Nothing in these documents.
The ability to transport these items is only
provided for in the police arms manual.
This document here,
as police are no longer the administrators under the bill.
This permission needs
to be preserved in the new re legislation as well.
The permission should be extended
to allow Pistol Club members
to bring their restricted firearms to a gun show
or a similar event for the purposes
of promoting their sport.
The bill contains a further three anomalies.
A new clause is the requirement that a minimum age
of 18 be reached
before an application for endorsement may be made.
Our club as well as the national organization
has always allowed junior members
to participate under supervision from the age of 12.
At 16, they are currently eligible to apply
for a firearms license and a pistol endorsement.
This new clause refutes the value of all the years
of training and experience that they would have acquired.
The Egmont Pistol Club feels this is unjustified.
The compliance section of the bill allows hard copy records
to be removed from pistol clubs by officers
of the arms authority.
These may be the only records held by the club.
This is wrong. Surely only a
copy need to be taken.
Finally, we are concerned about secure
and accurate record keeping by the arms Authority
members are concerned about the duality
of restricted firearms registration.
At present, there are two not quite
parallel systems for the registration
of a restricted firearm.
Currently, the process is to obtain a permit
to possess from the police,
and the police subsequently record
or transfer the ownership
of a restricted item in the police near database.
At the same time, there is a requirement for the owner
to make a duplicate registration in the firearms register,
which is not automatic
and which may not be a consistent description.
This duplication has been happening for two years.
The bill makes no indication of whether
or how future registration is to be unified
as police are no longer to be responsible
for firearms records.
When the bill empowers the new arms authority, will the bill
also remove this duplication of record keeping
and transfer the permitting process to the arms authority?
And any questions? Thank you.
Right. Well, thank you very much.
You obviously, you've got a few lawyers up there in
Egmont or the area.
Stratford, I've,
we've got Mr. Carl Bates got a question.
Thanks very much Dennis.
Very, um, very comprehensive submission.
Very much appreciated.
Um, one item that you didn't touch on,
but we've had pistol clubs, uh,
raise earlier in the day is the number of times
someone must, um, shoot in a year in order to have their,
uh, pistol endorsement being 12.
And a suggestion that that number should be less.
Does the Egmont Club have a view on that?
Um, well, we abide by the 12 shoots per year.
Um, and we keep the records, uh, accordingly,
but we have had instances where members have said
that they have had difficulty to keep up that 12
because of personal circumstances that come about.
Um, in the past,
and I'm talking about in the past,
beyond the last few years,
that was not necessarily a problem.
It was usually a matter for the Pistol Club member
to contact the local arms office or,
and explain perhaps there was a health event
or, uh, perhaps, um, they had work that took them out
of town for several months or something like that.
However, more recent times we've found, uh, members dealing
with the current arms authority, um, have, uh,
found a very, uh, rigid
and, um, inflexible approach, uh,
which basically, uh, puts all fault
and all blame upon the license holder.
So the, the issue is not so much the 12 shoots a year,
it's the attitude, the lack of flexibility currently,
which I think has been causing pain.
And we have lost members because of that.
Can I ask you, um, you talked about carrying
a pistol, so Yes.
About taking a rifle or hunting,
I put it in a locked, uh, rifle case.
What's the, you're saying there's just an absolute blank on
the legislation, so it's an oversight,
but what are the requirements if,
if you are transporting your pistols, do you have,
do you have to have 'em in a lock box where, how does that,
what are the rules around that?
Yes, that's correct. The pistols has
to be put carried in a lock box, um,
separate from any ammunition.
Um, and it's kept in that lock box
until you get onto the particular range
that you're going to shoot on.
You might be then putting on your holster
and in a special loading zone, um, you will then, uh,
remove the firearm, the pistol from the lock box
and uh, check that it's clear
and then put it in the holster where it's safe.
So when you are getting inspected
for your license every 10 years
or five years, whatever the, um,
do they look at your lockbox
that you transport the pistols in?
No, they don't tend to do that, but they could.
Uh, what they tend to do is look at the security
that you have in your own home,
because you have to have a higher level
of security than a normal say, rifle, uh, cabinet.
It has to be a six millimeter thick, uh,
equivalent steel cabinet as opposed
to a three millimeter. Um, alright.
And your, your comment about under 15, uh, sorry,
under 18, are you suggesting that pistol o uh,
pistol people should be able to get one at 16?
Or you're just saying when they come to
seek a license at 18, it has
to be more regard for what they've done?
We have two members in our club who have grown up, uh,
from a young age, um, with their father, who's also a keen,
uh, competitor and competes, uh, in other clubs
and competitions around the country.
Um, these, um, two boys, um,
growing up into young men now,
but they, uh, had to shoot under supervision
until they reached the age of 16 where they were able
to get their firearms licenses
and their pistol licenses, which allowed them
to shoot on a pistol range unsupervised.
And they had had, uh, three to four years
of intensive training
and they have the medals to prove the success of
that training because they've been very successful in
competitions around the country. But,
But not everyone's gonna be like that.
You might have a 16-year-old who turns up who's never shot.
Yes. Are you suggesting
that they should immediately get a full license for a pistol
At 16?
Yeah. And they've never shot before?
That's probably unlikely.
What happens when someone joins the pistol Club?
Um, first of all, they're encouraged
to have a firearms license to start with.
So if they don't, um,
they are guided in the process to do that.
Um, they're also under a six month probation
and there is a strict regime of, uh, training, supervision,
safety, uh, range officer training and so on.
Sorry, are you getting a warning?
No, no. That's alright. Yeah, no. Hey, thank you.
I think we, we've put it out of time, Mr.
Ley, but thank you for a very good submission
and particularly some of the, some indications for
around some of the
definitions. I thought that was very helpful.
Yes. Well, what I've written in,
in the written submission itself
is quite specifically written how the law changes, uh,
from the Mont Pistol club's point
of view should be reworded.
Yeah. And it would save a considerable space in the bill.
Okay. Thank you very much for your time today.
You're welcome. Right now we've got, um, the Federation
of Islamic Associations here with us this morning, Sala.
Thank you. Now
we have, uh, 10 minutes with you
Respected chair members of the committee.
S Ms. Rah.
The firearms law,
which we are discussing has been predicated
by the grief, the tangible grief,
the lasting grief, the memory,
and the legacy of the 51,
the 41 bullet, another injured, and so many others.
This is a tragedy, which is not just a Muslim tragedy,
as we have seen by the recent court cases.
It could have happened and little lit recent events could
have happened at a synagogue.
It could have happened at a church,
God forbid it could also happen happened at a school.
Please keep that in mind.
Please keep in mind.
And for the record, the failure of the arms licensing
was first raised by our organization, the Federation,
as a formal scope to investigate by the Royal Commission.
It wasn't before it. We were the one who raised it.
We had an independent investigation team of our youth.
And do you know what our independent investigation team
found that as early as 2017.
In the annual report of the commissioner, Mike Bush stated,
let me quote, due
to the increased demand in other police priority areas,
fear resources have been available for firearms licensing.
This you can see in the footnote of the police annual report
that footnote cost the 51 lives.
That footnote has cost intangible terms
over half a billion dollars as a result
of the Royal Commission recommendations.
So I'm preambling this
and I've spent five minutes in preambling this so
that you are aware and to give you the respect
of this eminent subcommittee.
The work that you're doing is very serious,
very meaningful,
and the future of the nation's safety
and wellbeing is in your hands.
You will be accountable.
Look, the bill is not only about making the whole licensing
system more efficient.
It is not only about making the system more convenient
for the lawful losers,
and there are many Muslim, um, gun, gun license holders.
It should also be about make,
does it make New Zealand safer?
We request this last metric, be the central
argument and your, in your deliberations.
Does it make, that should be the litmus test
when you have a minister
and many times mentioned, the motivation has been
to reduce the burden of licensed zones.
We agree. We also say that the convenience
of lawful unit users must never come at the expense
of robust safety guards.
51 lives were lost, 41 bullet wound.
There are people now still bullets in their body
and they're dying slowly right now.
They don't make the media fi supports clear
and forceable rigorous firearms controls.
Please do not let the language of flexibility,
convenience, and efficiency weaken the discipline of safety.
This was a statement which was written to us
and sent to us by our youth.
One of them was impacted.
We also recognize
that the independent regulator is a constructive state.
But let's be very clear in this age of political appointees
and so on so forth,
independence on paper doesn't automatically create trust.
Trust is not created by restructuring a loan.
It has to be earned by competence, transparency
file statement after March 15th.
The central question of trust is whether the new structure
will identify early risk secondary metrics, act decisively.
Don't give them so much time to, you know, to,
for the police to arrive, let the police arrive as
as happened preventing this recent case in, uh, Hawkes Bay
and never again be complacent in the face of danger.
I stopped and I thank you for your time.
Okay. I've got Mr. Todd Stevenson first.
Oh, thank you. And thank you for being here.
And, um, you actually answered part of my question,
which was yeah, you obviously quoted Mike Bush
and talked about, um, yeah, I suppose you could say the,
the lack of resources that were put into this area.
And then I think you've said
that actually you think the splitting up of the, uh,
regulatory role and the enforcement role is a good step.
Um, I also just looking at your submission, um, just
around obviously the, um, firearm safety authority
and the appointments, would it give knowing, um, that uh,
the whole of the cabinet actually has
to approve the appointment of the chief executive?
So it's actually, um, the minister,
I suppose is just taking it through the process,
which is actually done for other, um,
government appointments.
And in fact, yeah.
So the whole of the cabinet actually has
to sign on off on it.
Would that give you some confidence?
Um, that it's got proper oversight?
Democratic oversight is quite different, quite different.
That is part of the Democratic, I go by empirical evidence.
We have a chief executive
of a human rights commissioner appointed subsequently found
to be inappropriately who was passed through cabinet
and who turned out to be anti-Muslim and had to apologize.
So if you ask me whether I have confidence,
I have 100% confidence in our democratic system,
but the entirety of it.
So I think there needs to be a merit-based approach
as one of our people mentioned.
And when that merit-based approach is bypassed
by political appointees under whatever, guys,
I don't think we could accept that.
Right. So as long it's a merit-based appointment approved
by the cabinet, you
Are fine independently. Thank
you. Thank you. I'm gonna go
To Ms. Nui
Walters. Uh, thank you very much
and thank you to Ian's for the submission.
Um, I noted in your submission
that you were supporting keeping the ban on
semi-automatic weapons.
The bill also proposes potentially some exemptions.
So the use of semi-automatic weapons in competitions.
And I wondered if you would be able
to comment on your view on that.
We, when the Prime Minister came to us on March 15th,
we asked him and we thought it would be a complete ban
exemptions by the minister, uh, minister
who has said clearly many times she's there in support
of the gun control.
Uh, sorry, the, the gun, you know, uh, users,
we don't think that's fair.
And let's look at this competition.
We did an analysis of it. Yes, they're not in Olympics.
Not every sport is, not every sport is in Commonwealth,
but do you know who supports these major ones?
One which was mentioned recently of 120,000.
It was paid for in their own booklets by the gun
manufacturers and the munitions manufacturers.
In other words, it was a marketing, what did I say earlier?
The standard metrics should be, does it increase
or decrease public safety?
You already have the evidence of a terrorist,
not just in New Zealand, not just in Australia, also in uk,
also in Canada, also in US in many states
where they bypass this.
We have to have strict controls and the strict controls
and the people must be accountable.
Not one person was accountable, neither Mike Bush
nor the minister who cut the, uh, for the 51 who died.
So what I'm saying to you is no,
we should not have MSSA except PE control.
And so, so this is, yes, it is maybe sport.
There are many sports, like youth now want
to have this on the road.
You know, the wheeling cars out on a hot rod.
That's not a legitimate sport, but they want to have it.
I'm not saying this is equivalent, but I'm saying it
because some people compare driver's license
with gun license and brings arguments on that basis.
Excuse me. Apples and oranges in my culture are different.
I'm not sure if it's in their culture. Thank you. Okay.
Um, last question from Mr. Scott Willis.
Thank you for your submission.
And really it's a sap on Todd's question
because you talked about the need for trust
and we are dealing with firearms.
So trust and given tragedies we've had very, very important
and you've said, um,
opposing the minister appointing the regulator.
So I just wanna be really, really clear.
This is something that you think is inappropriate if I'm,
I'm reading correctly,
and you would rather that this was done
through a normal system
of public service appointed appointment.
Is that I totally agree. The public service approach.
You know, when we talk about democratic system
and oversight system, it has to be the whole lot.
Not just a little myopic area.
We have full trust in our ministers,
including the current minister, but trust
and confidence are two words which go together.
Confidence is the other one that we have to have.
And confidence must be empirically verified when you have
case after case after case cases,
which are brought into court of law
and found to be like the human rights commissioner when we
say, Hey, what's happening?
Mm-hmm. These are early signs of
what happened in other countries.
And we are going on the slightly slope
of political appointees,
political agenda when this should be a bipartisan approach.
Let's not forget March 15th said it would be a bipartisan,
bipartisan approach.
Every MP in parliament agreed except one.
And that we agree because that is
what parliament is all about.
What we now have is issues which are really from
agendas of many others coming into the safety.
So please, our request to you, 51 lies were lost
and nobody was accountable.
Please use that as the ultimate metrics
if you would allow me when an example was given recently
of a survey being done and only 0.0111%
or one person convicted out of 300,000, it was
that one person who could kill another 60 young children in
a school, in, in, in Wellington or Oakton
or Oaks Bay, wherever that one person.
So we have full trust and confidence in the police
and the security agencies and life.
So we believe it should not, should not just be gun, uh,
gang focused, but also these ti ideologic forces.
So let's be robust about it.
That is my definition of robust. Thank you.
Sorry I've taken more time.
No, very good rum.
Um, thank you for your time this morning. Um, very good.
And thank you for making time. Thank you so much.
Right. Uh, we're going to have, uh, Mr. McDonald, is it,
uh, from the New Zealand Air Gun Field Target Association?
That right? Was that, uh, zooming? Cool.
Yeah, can you hear me?
Yes, we can. Thank you.
And we see you too, which is even better.
Excellent. Um, sorry, I must apologize this morning.
I've actually got a, a bit of a sore throat.
Secondly, um, I would like to read my notes
and then take questions afterwards if that's okay with you.
Okay. We've only got 10 minutes, so please Yep.
Put a time of questions. Yeah.
Cool. Okay then.
So, um, I want to actually address the equality
surrounding air guns in New Zealand.
The bill contains a deficiency
and that being air gun energy is not defined.
The committee recognizes what constitutes an air gun
and what does not with high energy air guns exempt
not being, not being included as stated under the heading
of interpretation at the beginning of the bill.
However, it does not define what is high energy.
The bill item number 3 6 4 allows the committee
to deem any air going to be high energy and
therefore restricted and licensable.
This indicates that a clear decision has not been reached.
Um, it is the position of the injured A FTA, sorry,
New Zealand Air Gun Field Target Association, that
the definition of what is high energy needs to be clarified
and preferably before the final reading of the bill.
The, the Firearms Safety Authority
defines an air gun as any air gun, air pistol,
or weapon that uses compressed air
and not explosion to discharge a projectile including
BB guns, soft air pallet guns, and paintball guns.
Air guns are used for target shooting
national and international competition, whereas
the more powerful models may be used for bird control
and small pest control.
This creates the impression of two energy levels,
tar, um, target shooting, and high energy for pest control.
Yet no energy level is def, excuse me, is defined
air guns operate by CO2
or a spring piston being a break barrel
or a pre-charged pneumatic, which uses
a compressed air cylinder.
All of these mechanisms can be, can produce either low
or high energy.
So low energy air guns are widely used in competition
and are appropriate for introducing young people
to safe gun practices.
Most manufacturers of low energy air guns
make manufacture one for this purpose.
The central issue is defining high energy.
In England, air guns below 12 foot pounds
or 16 joules do not require a license.
The New Zealand Air Gun Field Target Association,
which is affiliated with the Weld Field Target Federation,
is governed by this 12 foot pound energy rule.
Our members have competed internationally since 2009,
including Phoenix, Arizona in 2024.
We believe that New Zealand should have dropped,
adopt the 12 foot pound energy standard
as this is the most practical solution given
that New Zealand has currently no energy standard.
At present, we have one type of mechanism
that requires a license while another
of equal power does not.
Regulation should be based on energy,
not on mechanism or caliber.
If we adopt the UK limit,
all air guns will be clearly classified as licensable
high energy or non licensable low energy.
There is a misconception that break barrel
air rifles are low powered.
This may have been the case 50 years ago,
but it is not true today.
Older models produced around 12 foot pounds of energy,
where modern versions are producing 24 to 30 foot pounds.
As technology advances, so will the energy levels.
If high energy air guns, regardless of mechanism
require a license, then the authority
will have an effective control in the community.
I community, I feel, can feel safer.
Low energy, air guns, those being below 12 foot pounds
are already governed by a club membership
and should not need a license.
If the law remains unchanged, high energy break,
the barrel air rifles will remain uncontrolled.
While low energy pre-charged pneumatic target rifles
will require a license.
This does not make sense.
The authority recognizes high energy is an issue
but has not yet addressed this.
And we would like this to find
and quantified, I speak
as a cumulative in New Zealand Field Target Federation
and as someone who has been in the industry eagan industry
for 24 years, I appreciate your consideration on this matter
and I welcome any questions.
Well look, uh, that was a very, um, helpful submission
because I think this is the benefit
of having select committee process.
You actually hear these things that none
of us probably contemplated,
but I think there's a lot of nodding going on here.
Mr. Mcgon, thank you.
I don't think we've got questions, but thank you.
I, that doesn't mean it's not relevant.
Really appreciate your time.
Well, basically our concern is
that this hasn't been addressed
and we would like it to be addressed.
We have not, we'd like a solution
to come forward and I'm obviously
Yeah, we, we hear you.
Yeah, we hear you. Officials will be on. We are not.
We're nodding. Okay. Thank you very much. Um,
And I'd like to be a part of that
solution if I was required.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Right now we're going to, um, miss, uh, Wadsworth
representing three organizations.
Uh, the Riverside Target Rifle Club,
Marlborough Small Ball Rifle Club
or Association in the South Island
Target Shooting Association.
Um, is she with us? Right? Cool.
E, sorry. EE oh, sorry.
Is it Alright, sorry. Um, I apologize Mr.
Wadsworth. Hey, now we've got, um, 10 minutes with you.
You obviously associated with a lot of clubs,
so looking forward to hearing what you've gotta say.
Yep. Uh, thank you chairman.
Um, I'm speaking on behalf of three clubs,
which you mentioned.
Um, I'll cover quickly a few points from my submissions
and allow time for questions.
Um, I'll go to the latter points first
because it's appropriate that I just follow the
gentleman from the Field Target Association
and our sport also uses their guns
and the inequity in the previous laws
has caused US issues.
Um, firstly I'm gonna ask a, a legal question
and it's not for me to answer
because, um, I'm only a Bush lawyer, not a, um,
qualified lawyer qualifi.
But part eight of the restricted of the definition says
to the restricted air gun
is one which resembles a standard firearm.
Now all air guns resemble standard firearms in some form.
And I'm asking, surely this is a typo.
I can't see why
that would then place all air guns into a restricted
category and I'll, I'll just leave that with you.
Right. Um, we support as the A FTA did
before us, the changed air gun classification,
removing the old especially dangerous category, replacing it
with a high energy category, which we presume
as the previous speaker is gonna be based on M energy.
We hope that would be a case, but it's not stated anywhere.
This should have been the case from the start
blanket inclusion of all PCP air rifles.
High energy and low energy in this category in 2010 was from
our sports perspective, a simplistic
ill-advised Ill considered failure.
Well, I make no bones about that.
Other countries have been using m energy
to define high power, didn't air guns for decades yet.
New Zealand went off script in 2010.
Well allow low energy PCP target air guns were restricted,
much higher energy spring gas type guns,
as the previous gentleman said, continued unrestricted.
So the question is, what will a threshold be?
Who's gonna set it and will the Air gun community be
involved in that setting of it?
It needs to be an objective quantifiable number.
Um, now I'll duck back to
the other concern which our court has.
And I would like the chair's permission
to show you a firearm.
I'm not gonna point it at you,
I'm not gonna threaten you with it. Is that okay? Yeah,
That's fine. But we've
only got a few minutes, but fine, please. Yep.
Right. This is
Now you've got your blurred background on,
so it's actually meaning that we can't see all the rifle,
Right? Let's get rid
of that. Thank you.
Sorry. This is what we call a barreled action.
It's the, the basis of our target rifles.
It's got a barrel, it's got a receiver at this end,
and it has a bolt in its current format.
I could still put the bolt in, load a bullet and fire.
This wouldn't be very accurate, but it is still a firearm.
Now in our sport, we tend to mix
and match the, if you like, the handles of the firearms.
So that's the stock that came off that firearm.
That's another stock which fit the same firearm.
Another stock highly modified by a user,
but it was one of those wooden ones.
Modified still fits the same firearm.
A factory made stock from a different company refitted to
that firearm, A very
basic stock.
Now this was made by a good friend of mine, now dead.
Um, but milled out of aluminum.
He made everything on the
stock himself.
And finally, a semi commercially produced
stock made by a New Zealand shooter.
The point here is Stocks are simply handles
and shooters in our sport tend to be innovative
and develop, um, solutions.
So the, the stock that I showed you last, the green stock,
there's probably 80 or 90 of those been made over the years.
The butt plate on the same rifle.
Um, there's been hundreds made by a New Zealand shooter.
The problem we have is now that those items are classified
as firearms parts
and they will then have to be sold through a dealer.
And quite frankly, that's gonna be inefficient
for both dealers and ourselves.
So we would like a reclassification of the parts
that we commonly manufacture that are not part
of the operational fire firearm.
They're just the accessories that you need to try
and improve the fit of the rifle to yourself.
This is described in my personal submission,
so I'll stop there and, um, see if there's any questions.
Yeah. Very good. So just to confirm, uh, just in line
with the previous submitter, I presume you, you agree
with the 12 feet, uh, per pound and
or the, uh, 16 jogs definition?
Is that what you're suggesting?
I wasn't gonna put in a number on it
because I didn't know what the
community number would be.
Um, 12 is the, and
That's an international number? That's an international
Number. It's international. Yeah.
What you'll find is that, um, there's a make
of Spanish fi firearm who make a lot
of firearms in the 20 to 24 dual category.
And that's because the Spanish limit is 24.5.
So out there in the community,
there will be literally hundreds of thousands
of these high powered brake barrel gas piston air rifles.
Um, which will fall into,
and I'm not saying it's a bad thing,
but they'll fall into the high energy thing,
into the high energy category.
And that will be a new licensing
area that will have to be addressed
because a lot of those people have bought high firearms
simply because they can without a license.
And maybe some of them shouldn't have them.
Um, maybe some of them want to shoot bunnies, maybe some
of them want to shoot the neighbor's cats.
I've heard of that. Um,
but yes, uh, we have no problem
with the 16 Jos 12 foot pound.
Um, but it will create a bit of a legislative issue, uh, uh,
a um, enforcement issue.
Right. Cool. Um, any other questions?
The manufacturing one,
we've got another submitter who's gonna talk about that
as well, but that's very helpful.
Looking at those different stocks and hand buts.
You, you've raised the whole hand stocks,
but plates, site extension tubes,
what's a site extension tube?
Is that making the scope longer?
Uh, no, not the scope.
Um, some of our older members like to put a,
what we call a BLO tube
and a muzzle extension on here,
which changes the site radius, which allows their old eyes
to see the foresight more clearly.
So it might be an aluminum tube, which is about maybe 150
to 200 millimeters long.
Okay. Suits, suits, older eyes.
Alright, very good.
Thank you for your submission
and, uh, joining us from Marlborough.
Thank you. Right now we're gonna move on.
Um, we have the National Rifle Association of New Zealand.
Mr. Dodson is it?
Thank you Mr. Chairman. You've waited patiently.
Yeah, I'm here for the day.
Yeah. So you, you've, uh, know the drill.
Yes, I certainly know the drill.
Uh, firstly, uh, and very briefly,
I know Val Wadsworth extremely well.
I'm the president of the Mob Small Ball Associ
Rifle Association.
And what he was saying about rifle stocks
and that they're handled very much carries over into the
same types of things
that the National Rifle Association used and those rifles,
because I know there's quite a lot
of scoreboard stocks actually taken
and used as rifle stocks at our sport.
So that's additional. In the wake
of the Christchurch shootings, there were a raft
of regulations introduced over non pistols shooting clubs.
This was largely in response to the narrative
that was pushed from police headquarters
that the terrorists had trained at a club.
It is not the job of shooting clubs to vet people
for a firearms license.
That was the job of police for non pistols shooting clubs.
All the current regulations achieved is
to give the police commissioner a a list of shooting clubs.
Clubs in their contacts were generally already known
to the district arms offices.
And in many instances, personally,
the target shooting sports are amongst the safest
of any sport in the country.
As an organization, we have safely run
and been responsible for our operating procedures
and range safety for about 130 years without the need for
or any justification for police oversight or regulation.
All of the sections in the new bill
regarding non pistols shooting clubs could actually be
deleted along with the threat of up
to $10,000 fines on volunteers with no effect on the number
on the members or the community safety risk.
We are aware that the clubs
and rangers sections have already been
through the select committee process,
but there are some specific sections that we have concerns
with specifically.
One of them is the inspection
of any place a club stores firearms or ammunitions.
In the case of our organization, there's very few of them
that actually have club firearms that store them
Our on club premises, mainly
because their ranges are often quite isolated, rural
and security of the premises can be difficult.
So they're stored in members' own safes and facilities.
Currently this wording allows the range inspector to ask
to be able to go
to people prop people's own individual properties.
We believe the wording should say inspect the place
where clubs store firearms
and ammunitions on the club premises.
The next item, and it was mentioned earlier by one
of the submitters, is the removal
of hard copy documents of a club.
The previous section actually allows copying,
printing or photographing.
So why do they need to be able
to uplift hard copy documents?
The only recourse under this legislation for a club then is
through the courts and what's the club supposed
to do if it's got none of its documents.
Uh, the last another section is improvement notices, uh,
with no issues with them being issued except
for the last part of it.
The wording in there is likely to fail or contravene.
It suddenly has gone from being objective, something
that's subjective and we always have
problems with subjective.
It's, those are subject to bias and things like that.
Uh, another clause to six eight possessing ammunition
components intending to manufacture
this clause also includes non-MS items, items such
as instructional materials, tools and equipment,
and uses the word indicating indicate and intention.
Two. Um, all of our members, virtually all
of our members are hand loaders.
We've got all of that equipment in our, on our properties.
This legislation would actually main mean
that it has to all be locked up.
Most of the stuff's bolted,
the benches and things like that.
Um, it's notar material.
Yes, it's used to assemble ammunition,
but without the components
and particularly the explosive components
and ammunition, it's not an ammunition.
Possession is covered in other sections in this act.
And we believe this piece about tools
and equipment should not be there.
We support the licensing review committee and its functions,
but its re it needs to be expanded
to include in the first instance the license categories in
clause 3 41, which is dealers, clubs,
ranges and things like that.
Having the only recourse if the, uh,
chief executive turns you down is to the district court.
And we believe there should be recourse to another review
system without the expense
and the timeframes involved in going to the district court.
And who might that be?
Uh, there's a, uh,
with this is the licensing review committee that's,
that's already in the bill
who just believe it's remit should be expanded
to include those categories of,
they're basically another type of license anyway.
At the moment, the cat, it only allows
for individual licenses to be reviewed.
Uh, the sections in the new bill
regarding health practitioners are impractical
and simply don't reflect
what happens in modern practices
using locums and telehealth.
These clauses could have the effect
of dissuading people from seeking help for fear
of losing their firearms license.
And we've heard about that already this morning.
Um, there's been talk about the needing a consultation
with a health professional before you can get a license.
And I just asked a simple question
of can an already stretch health profession cope
with another 20,000 referrals a year?
'cause that's 10% of the licensed population would need a,
a referral every year.
And even just the paperwork involved in what's recommended
in this, I'm sure will be a burden.
And it's particularly gonna fall on, on rural areas
because the level of firearms ownership
and the likes of Southland Marlborough, Nelson Westland
Hawkes Bay is about 10% of the population in the cities.
It's less than 2%.
So it's gonna fall uneven unevenly on areas
that already have issues with health prac.
The numbers of health practitioners Clause 300,
we are adamant the police are not the right organization
to be administering the Arms Act or being the regulator.
Their job is enforcement of the law
and dealing with law breakers.
Unfortunately, this is the attitude that they have bought.
The firearms regulation and licensed firearms owners.
That is that we are law breakers.
Do I follow on throughout this bill?
The 10 of most of it is that you are guilty until you prove
that you are innocent.
That is the actual wording in some clauses
that is wrong in all ways.
In terms of natural justice.
If you are charged with anything, your license is suspended
or revoked for five years without recourse.
Even if the charges are dropped, proven
to be false dismissed or malicious, you were guilty anyway.
Questions? Um, right, we're going to Mr. Todd Stevens.
Actually, just to pick up on your kind of last point.
I've thank you for your submission.
It's quite detailed, but yeah,
just you're obviously talking about the fit
and proper, um, person's test
and fact that yeah, even if you were charged, um,
your license could be just revoked basically.
Yeah. Is there a Well,
and your, from your point of view, what Yeah,
how could this be handled in a more kind of way
that would actually make more sense?
Oh, for start, if the charges are actually dropped
or the charges are dismissed,
it still seems to hang over you.
The fact that you've been charged,
that you'll be suspended anyway
or your license can still be revoked.
There's no immediate recourse in this
that the revocation has dropped straight away.
Now I'm not an expert, but I know it's an area
that's being highlighted to me submission. So I mentioned
No, that's why I was curious about what you were thinking.
Okay. No, that's good. Thank you.
Okay, I'm going to Honorable doc. Dr. Duncan Webb.
Okay. Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, thanks for your submission.
Um, you opened up with some comments on the role
of gun clubs and one of the things you said was worse
to the effect that it's, it's not up to gun clubs
to vet their members.
Now can you just explain what you mean by
that a bit and what function?
The gun club does have to keep an eye on people make sure
that they're, you know, responsible
and there doesn't seem to be anything going wrong.
I didn't say that they,
we should be vet not be vetting our members.
I said it is not the responsibility of clubs to vet people
for a firearms license, which is quite different.
And this is basically the insinuation
that police left on clubs
that we hadn't done their job for them. And then
Reporting tar. I
guess my point is that, you know,
I think gun clubs actually do have an important role
to play in being a place where people come and learn and,
and look after each other a bit.
And I'm just giving, I'm inviting you to talk about that.
Oh, I'm not denying that we do that,
but it was the implication.
I i it was just the implication from police
that it was our job to vet that person.
We do vet members,
members have application forms for membership.
It goes through a committee process
and you see people on the range,
but you're not gonna, if somebody turns up
with a police approved firearms license,
you're not gonna turn them away from the range.
The first time you meet them, you're gonna watch them
and see what happens on the range.
If you've got concerns, you're then supposed to,
or probably should take it to the local arms office,
which always used to be the first step if we had
concerns about anybody.
But I'm, I'm just saying that the expectation pushed on us
by police and, and driving their narratives.
That was that we should have done the vetting for them,
the process at which they failed.
So, uh, just on that comment, the um,
the Muslim Association that we just shared
before, we didn't discuss,
but one of the five recommendations was a requirement
for gun clubs or anyone
to make the authorities known about someone who
they perceive as a risk.
Now I understand with the Terence situation,
actually the gun club did on two occasions, um,
make police aware, but it wasn't actioned the
do you in a wider sense,
and I think this is what Duncan's question's about.
Um, well the first point is do gun clubs.
Um, you say, you know, you have
to accept 'em if they've got a firearms license.
So you seen the process. Yeah. You accept them
Face value if they have a license.
Yeah. But after that,
when you're observing them on the range,
do gun clubs in the main, uh,
if they have concerns about people, they turn 'em away.
Do they make other gun clubs aware of that situation?
Do they go to the extent, you know,
we all remember the arms office, uh, uh,
which now I don't know, we,
you'd probably end up getting the regulator.
Do you, do you think that should be mandatory
or you don't think it should require
because they do it anyway?
When we felt like there was a two-way street between clubs
and the local arms officers, people were quite relaxed about
actually expressing concerns about people that,
you know, that had turned up.
And I believe actually part of the earlier, you know,
I know people that had been firearms trainers, they used
to do the same thing when they were local likes
of local NZDA members
and things like that that were doing the firearms training.
They used to go back to the arms offices
and say, we don't think this guy should have a license
before they ever even got them.
Um, I'm not, I don't, I dunno
as much about the training processes now,
but that's what's happened in the past.
But as, as clubs, yeah. Uh, we've had concerns.
And when there was a good two-way street, I know
the situation with their previous submitter of Val Osworth,
they had a, a situation in their club
where somebody had turned up and actually
because they had a good relationship with the local police,
the police had a word to them
and said, you know, you realize this
guy's got a bit of history.
Yeah. So do you, so
because this is an important function, right.
And the good old days, people would ring up the arms officer
and have that conversation.
Right. Nowadays you, um, there's a potential as a club view
narc or whatever, whatever word you wanna use.
And I'm being slightly emotional about it,
but if you, if you do that, you raise liability issues
for the clubs for doing that.
You know, you could possibly, so my my question
because we want you, we want in the legislation,
we want it at happening at a practical level.
We are a club or someone sees someone
and you go, they shouldn't have a firearms license.
Feel free and free to be able to go and do that
and free outside of potential liability
unless it's clearly, you know, being, uh, malicious.
But we want that arrangement to put in place.
'cause that's the first line of defense. Yeah,
I realize that. Yeah. And
generally the, yeah, I think in some ways
I don't know, but the Christchurch terrorist went to a club.
It's possibly unusual with people with those kinds
of attitudes that are gonna go
and display themselves for want of a better term
in a club generally.
They're probably gonna keep to themselves.
And any police will tell you
that the lone wolf is the hardest person to ever find.
So I suppose the question we got,
But Yeah, I I I totally agree with you that that,
you know, a good rapport between local clubs
and what used to be the local fi arms officer
was always a good, and I'm sure there's some
of the people sitting behind me
of have expressed concerns to office.
But I'm talking about maybe a clause that says that uh,
any gun club, if they have um, legitimate concerns, uh,
should uh, make that informa about a particular individual
should make that that information available
to the regulator without recrimination.
You know, because that,
and it should be rather than has to mandatory.
But should, would that be helpful
or you think it's happening anyway?
Certainly used to happen. It's
Lost a lot of trust in the wake of 2019
and with the changes that have been made,
the loss of armed local arms
Offices, I've got people at the back there.
We might, um, um, the use of the word may rather than sugar
or shell Yeah.
Would have an effect if it was written into the act
of the club may Yeah.
That would then eliminate liability. Yeah.
If you put must or shell Yeah.
Then it's a whole, that's why I didn't use that word. Yeah.
Yeah. Anyway. Alright.
Um, I'm, and obviously we've got people
who are gonna submit, we've got lots
of submission today in a few days, so thank you.
Just the thought there.
But thank you for your submission this morning.
Um, very good. Right.
Um, we are moving on rapidly.
Some of these themes can be picked up.
Uh, sports New Zealand,
we're having a lot on this at the moment.
We've got a theme going, uh, Mr. Allen,
We're happy about that Committee
representative, is that right? Yeah,
Yeah. Was formerly
the president once upon time. But you've
Been demoted As you know, like meetings is,
I'd rather do the business than, uh,
10 minutes or anything like that.
Um, so yeah. Hi, I'm Ben Allen.
Uh, so I'm here on behalf of Thees Soft Sports Incorporated.
Um, well a s nz.
So firstly thanks the committee
for letting me come while letting us speak in person
and for reading our submission.
So Soff New Zealand is a nonprofit organization established
in 2007.
We made up of representatives from each
of the currently 21 dedicated member clubs
from all over the country.
Um, so our purpose is promote sport,
develop sport in a safe environment.
It's, that's on behalf
of the players, basically in the clubs.
Um, if you don't know, so Airsoft is similar to paintball.
Uh, we use a six millimeter plastic,
they called biodegradable bbs.
Um, it's effectively the same game if
you're familiar with paintball.
We're just using a different platform or different tools.
Um, so we play on private fields generally
'cause we want to keep out of the public eye
'cause we're not trying to scare anybody,
but we're aware that it might look scary.
Um, so both air soft
and paint guns are specifically designed
to fire non-lethal projectiles at a low
and safe philosophy for gaming.
So no, the previous submitters on the airguns we're talking
sort of 12 joules, 25 joules.
Our top end that we recommend is, is 3.3 for a snipe rifle.
Generally we're sitting about one 1.6 joules.
So that's the significantly low end of the,
the airgun spectrum.
Um, so we're not, shouldn't be confused
with like slug guns and pellet guns, that sort of thing.
That, that's, that's the point I'm trying to make there.
I guess. So my submission is, is limited on
how the bill affects air soft and paintball sports.
Um, in principle we, we support the bill,
but there are areas for improvement.
Um, I'll talk quickly about our two main points
and then I'll, I'll hand over to questions.
Um, but the critical ones is the meaning
of restricted ear gun, which came up earlier.
Mm-hmm. I, I suspect it's just a typo
and they've just cut and paste.
Standard ear gun, our standard firearm.
'cause by definition
that would just make every ear gun a restricted ear gun.
You might as well not even have the different definition.
So I'm hoping that's an easy fix.
That's just a, a drafting error.
The second one is meaning of business activity.
So I've gone into, into detail in the written submission,
but basically if we can agree
that, um, well currently the requirements in the act
impose a higher re regulatory standard on an
SO club hiring and air gun out
or lending an ear gunn to its players
or members, then a real then a shooting
club does for a real firearm.
And that's doesn't seem like it's
in the interest of public safety.
So if we can agree that that shouldn't be the case
and I've put the wording in the, in the recommendation
and then the written submission as well, um,
to exclude not only firearms but also ear guns
and other arms items.
Um, and then another recommended a new section which is
basically just changing the, the existing exemption
for firearms clubs and applying that to Air Soft
and paintball clubs with regards to ear guns.
Um, if, if we all agree on that, um,
that's, that's a super easy fix and I've
provided the writing, hopefully
That's your day done, is it? Mm-hmm.
What's That? That's your day done. If we do that well
That would be great. So
if, if you disagree, I'd love
to hear your questions first.
Alright. And we can talk about it.
But otherwise I'm happy to take
Questions. Cool. Any, um,
any
Oh, I was just gonna say, well fact, no, thanks.
'cause this is super clear.
Um, I think, yeah, we've obviously heard about this standard
firearm drafting issue before.
Yeah. And then just so I'm super clear,
so the point you're basically making is yeah,
people are running these businesses.
You obviously come along.
I've done the paintball myself, it was a while ago.
But yeah, we don't want to kind of be captured
by this kind of dealer's.
Yeah. And and we're not businesses either.
We are just incorporated aside. Right.
So in your case, yes. Yeah. Right. Okay.
I think this is pretty clear and you've given us a draft.
So we, we talked about it 2020, we brought it up and,
and I put it in a submission.
Yeah. Everyone kind of agreed, but it over, it's still got
and we are the, the lower end of the, the firearms act.
It doesn't mean you're not just No,
I think we've got a good opportunity to fix this up for
You. Right, right.
We're gonna have the
Thank you very much Mr. Allen. I think we're there,
Are there any other questions? I don't
Think so.
I mean, I'd love to talk about
more, I love talking about this
As much as we'd like to hear
Peter. I don't think we need to,
One point is on the, um, the nuisance, um,
section or now section 2 5 9.
So if someone's discharging and
and it annoys somebody, then that can be an offense.
Yeah. And it's so like what, I mean,
I'm sure some people in here are annoyed that we're going
through this process again,
but we wanna, what, when does somebody feeling annoyed
make me committing offense rather than something actually
subject, you know, that we can measurable is
Probably that. I'm sure that's in the
act though, isn't
It? It's, yeah, it's
not, it's someone's
A that's a pitch for something else.
2, 5 9, sorry,
2 5 9. Yeah,
2 5 9. So
if it's a measurable thing,
like you're threatening somebody, that's fair enough.
But if somebody just sees us
and feels annoyed, that shouldn't be a, a legal definition
of well that's now an offense. So that's,
We'll see what we can, I'll I'll leave it there.
We'll see what we can, there's plenty
others in the written submission,
But, uh, alright. Okay.
Well done. Thanks for time anyway. Okay, cool.
We're right on time. I you're
Not being annoying, so that's good.
No, we're a bit early. Not yet. Yeah.
Thank you. Um, miss, uh,
Jeffries from the Royal Estate,
Australian New Zealand College of Psychiatrists.
Are you here? Are you I I'm a replacement. I'm sorry. Yeah.
Well, okay. I just saw you walk in too.
That was just on time.
Look, the plane landed about 10 minutes ago.
Running very good. Primarily late. Sorry, what's your name?
Dr. Eric Monas. I'm a forensic psychiatrist
Representing the Royal Australia.
Good. Where's Broe? What's that?
Sorry? Where's Broe? Its,
It's as much of a mystery to me as it is to you. Right.
Okay, cool. Right. Are you happy? You ready?
I'm as ready as I ever will be.
I've only just run here. I'm all good to go.
All cool. Cool. Right. I'm sure you do this as a try.
We've got 10 minutes.
Excellent. So, as I said,
I'm representing the Royal Australian New Zealand College
of Psychiatrist in relation to this submission.
I'm a forensic psychiatrist, have been in practice for close
to 30 years that I'm representing the views
of the college here today.
Uh, I take it that the submission has been read
and considered, so I don't want to waste too much
of your time reading materials that's already been reversed.
So I'm available to answer any questions in relation
to our submission
and particularly point out some of the concerns
that the college and myself as a forensic psychiatrist have
in respect to some of the proposals within that bill,
I could just briefly read the first page of our submission,
which summarizes our concerns. And
Yeah, we just talked, uh, you've got about six of 'em,
so just briefly map, be helpful.
Okay. So the Royal Australian New Zealand College
of Psychiatrist is the peak body representing psychiatrist
in Australia and New Zealand, whereby national college
that trains doctors to become medical specialists.
In psychiatry, we support
and enhance clinical practice, advocate for people affected
by mental illness and addiction,
and advise governments on matters related
to mental health and addiction care.
We represent over 8,730 members,
including 6,000 qualified psychiatrists and two
and a half thousand trainees.
Our training policy
and advocacy work is led by expert committees
of psychiatrists and subject matter experts with academic,
clinical and service delivery experience
and mental health care and addiction.
The college welcomes the opportunity to respond
to the crimes amendment Bill.
2, 2, 3, 1. We opposed the proposed assault on the
provisions for first responders.
In our view, the bill treats a system failure
as an individual crime penalizing people experiencing
mental health crisis.
Instead of addressing the real problem,
untrained responses being sent into situations
that requires specialist mental healthcare expertise.
The R-N-R-A-N-C CCP supports evidence-based firearms
regulation that protects public safety.
However, sections nine
and 3 6 1 of the arms bill contain significant flaws
that will undermine both safety and equity.
Section 9 1 1, deems people not fit
and proper to hold firearms licenses.
If they quote show
or have recently shown symptoms of a mental
or physical illness, this provision lacks empirical support.
Mental illness is not a reliable predictor of firearms.
Risk is operationally unclear.
There is no definition of what symptoms are mental illness
or what the definition of recently shown means.
This will deter help seeking,
creating perverse safety outcomes
by discouraging treatment engagement.
And it enables discriminatory application
with no safeguards against racist
or an equitable assessments.
Section 3 6 1 requires health practitioners to consider
reporting, reporting fitness concerns,
but provides no guidance on assessment,
no professional protections,
and no clarity on what it, what considers means.
Resulting in risk averse defensive practice
or inconsistent decisions.
The combined provisions rely on serial psychiatric
assessments, but do not consider workforce capacity
or funding constraints.
New Zealand is experiencing severe shortage of psychiatrists
resulting in wait times that can last for months.
If these assessments become too costly
or difficult to access, individuals may resort
to acquiring firearms
outside the official licensing process,
which would heighten rather than mitigate risk.
Critically, firearms licensing is not
solely a medical problem.
Assessment requires diverse expertise.
Cultural advisors, domestic violence specialists,
community safety workers, youth workers in kaki.
For example, a person who assaults their partner
or animal should trigger immediate removal based on
demonstrated violence and victim safety,
not clinical diagnosis.
This is a community safety issue requiring AU
and specialist expertise, not psychiatric gatekeeping.
Okay. So it just briefly goes through the summary
of the key concerns and then I'm
open to answering questions.
Yeah. Briefly so I'm sure we have questions. Mm-hmm.
The RNs, RAN CS
CP supports evidence-based firearms regulation
that protects public safety.
However, we have significant concerns about section
1 9 1 1 and section three six.
One of the bill. Section nine one uses symptoms
of a mental illness or physical illness as licensing
criteria which lacks empirical support as a predictor
of firearms risk.
The provision of operationally unclear,
there is no definitions of symptoms, mental illness
or what recently shown means.
Section 3 6 1 establishes health practitioner reporting
obligations without providing assessment guidance
or professional protections.
The combined effect will create perverse safety outcomes
by deterring help seeking behavior.
The provisions lack safeguards
to prevent discriminatory application and do not reflect ity
or Wang obligations.
Okay, cool. Right.
We'll start off with Mr. Todd Stevenson. Thank
You and thanks. Thanks
for running here and being here.
And, um, thank, I think there's a really good submission
and obviously you've actually given some ideas about
what could be put into section 1 9 1 1,
but other, just another quick question.
We've obviously, one
of the other changes this bill makes is the suspension
period related to mental health issues
of a license from three months to 12 months.
And the idea being that that means that, um, you know,
someone would seek help and,
and obviously, um, yeah, try to yeah, seek help, but,
but their license isn't immediately canceled
and in fact they can, you know, look to get it back.
Is that something that the college would support
that that change?
Uh, the view of the collagen of myself as a, as a clinician
with three decades of experience is that
mental illness symptoms are ubiquitous.
So they, they would apply
to almost anyone in the population
at any point in their lives.
So it's just so broadly nonspecific, equally So
psychiatric diagnosis, so it's so broad a concept
that the report reporting requirements
will capture almost anybody or everybody.
Yeah. The additional factor of course is that
the reporting requirements are so broad
immediately it will discourage people from reporting
symptoms if either they're applying
or holding firearms licenses.
What we also know is that particular groups at a higher risk
of mental disorders, serious mental disorders
and risk to themselves, particularly from suicide
and the reporting requirements being so broad,
it will most likely discourage those groups of people.
And here we are looking at farmers, for example, who
hold firearms licenses
and have a high rate
of mental distress and mental disorders.
So imagine if a farmer who often struggles with mood
and anxiety symptoms is reluctant to disclose
that information to the GP for fear of the implications
of loss of firearms license equally.
So people leaving living in rural communities have more
firearms licenses, but they also present with higher risks
of mental disorders.
We are concerned that it will create a disincentive
and that will therefore have the opposite effect of
what we are, what the bill is intending to achieve.
Yeah, great. I think that's really helpful.
'cause what we are grappling with here is exactly
that wanting, we're wanting people
to actually make sure they get help,
but we don't wanna punish them particularly around their,
their status as a licensed firearm owner, owner holder.
Sorry for doing that. So this has been, this is very
Helpful. So, um, and
I think that was a concern
of the original committee heard
that we always had concerns about that.
Thus, we are grappling with a very vex issue,
and that's your life, which is, you know, it's difficult.
People in different states, the definition you pose
for nine, section nine though,
it's talks about, um, what's gone on,
history of violence, substance use, current engagement,
and behaviors that pose immediate safety
or identify as high risk.
The issue with that, if I'm just thinking about if I've got
history from 10 years ago, then that's gonna be captured.
So you never get out of that zone, um,
because people may go through a period of their,
in their life early on,
but then come through that situation.
So even applying your practical,
and it's really useful that you've, you've come up
with factors, there's sort of a relevancy about it, which is
you 20 years ago, you might have been like that
as a young kid, but now you're a grown person
and you're, you, you've shown long term stability
that's not captured in your definition, is it?
Look, what we are aiming to bring to the attention
of the committee is the risks
of linking broad psychiatric symptoms and diagnosis to risk.
Yeah. Previous behavior is a challenge.
Um, but as you say, people
often experience maladaptive behaviors at earlier stages
of their lives and then go on to have a through
to a more satisfactory period of stability.
Yeah. And it would make sense in a,
in a broad principles-based approach for a long period
of stability to indicate potentially a maturing out
of engaging in maladaptive behaviors to such an extent that
that person then is fit to hold a firearms license.
The concerns that we have is applying psychiatric concepts,
um, to predict risk.
Yeah. Because most psychiatric disorders are actually not
associated with risk to others,
but rather people who have those diagnosis
are at greater risks themselves.
So most psychiatric symptoms
and diagnoses don't confer risk to the community.
However, there, there are some psychiatric diagnosis
and in particular some symptoms of diagnosis.
Generally the psychotic related conditions,
which alongside other individual characteristics, then
signal quite clearly an increased potential risk for harm.
Right. But the issue you've got is
that when you go see a j uh, gp, they're not a psychiatrist
with 30 years, 30 dec or 30 years experience like you.
So, so the difficulty in all legislation,
and this is the difficulty that all parliamentarian scrap
with drug is one, is you can seek to define it.
And in this case we're asking gp, jps, uh, gps
who are brutally untrained in this area.
I don't mean dismissive
And No, and that is, that is quite an accurate
representation of what dayto today.
So we're asking, so the difficulty going down your route
is a, um, making sure it's still relevant
to the consideration of the person right in front of me, not
what went on 30 years ago.
And being prescriptive then leads a lot
of discretion, takes away the discretion.
So that's, that's why legislation's often,
often principle based rather than being details based.
But we, we pick up your point, which is, um,
there is no framework and particularly for reporting
and things like that, so that's very useful.
But it is a, it's a difficult area to, uh, to deal
with in legislation, which is such a
dreadful way of doing these things.
And I may thank you for your submission,
very comprehensive.
And I'm thinking about your request
that TA obligations are respected.
So if you could go into a little bit more detail about how,
how best we should do that in this bill
As a college of psychiatrists,
we focusing on issues specific to mental health
and addictions and,
and we know that there is this precaution burden
of mental disorders
and addiction problems in, in Maori communities.
What we are aiming to bring to the attention
to the committee is just how non-specific
and broad psychiatric symptoms are,
which would immediately place a burden
on the person holding the license
or applying for a license potentially
to prove that they're not at risk.
Mm-hmm. When the mental health risk factor
is such a poor predictor mm-hmm.
It flips the burden on the person of flying,
holding the license.
And that will more disproportionately place the burden on
those who have more of symptoms, which in
and off themselves are not particularly good predictors.
Mm-hmm.
Alright. Have we picked up you
with 3 6 1, uh, recommendations?
Specify evidence based risk factors,
provide operational definitions
and incorporate cultural safety pro principles,
established graduated response protocols, et cetera.
Um, we would have to, if we got a group
of psychiatrists in a room, what do you call you, a gaggle
of psych, whatever it may
Probably a confusing afternoon is what I call mm-hmm.
Where's the politicians by the way? But um, indeed.
So what do you think, do you think you could come up with a,
a sort of a, a basis that,
or would we put it out there into a sort of a netherland,
it'd be very difficult to actually come up
with a sort of a approach on it.
See that's the issue we've got, isn't it?
Could, would you guys be able
to come up with something or not?
Look, we, we certainly,
particularly in forensic psychiatry, hold expertise
and providing the best risk assessment
that's potentially achievable within the constraints
that science has around predicting human behavior.
So there are structured assessment tools
and clinical judgment processes
and certainly psychiatrists can provide a
framework around that
For the gps.
Um, well that's part of the problem is
that GP has such a limited consultation.
Yeah. And it seems to us that the approach here is
that the GP picks up on a concern
and part of the concerns that you're requesting GPS
to focus on are symptoms of a mental illness or a diagnosis.
But that is so nonspecific
that ideally if the GPS follow the bill Yeah.
They should be reporting very high
numbers of people, everyone.
Yeah. And then of course the next question is,
and if you like that that's part of a first
tranche of a triage.
The second triage is then this person who's been identified,
then the burden falls on then does it not to ensure
that they satisfy the licensing authority,
that they're not at risk.
Yeah. So the next set of um, assessment processes,
if you like, your second triage process then needs
to be much more rigorous
and that's what we think we could contribute
To. Right. Okay.
But of course that that there's just,
even though you'd like to have a whole psychiatrist here in
an afternoon, there's just not enough of them.
Yeah. So part of the problem,
problem will be is who's going to do this work?
Certainly we could advise the committee at to
what a reasonable and you know,
what the gold standard risk assessment process is.
But it is resources intensive.
Alright. Hey, thank you very much
and thank you for your last minute rush from the airport,
but, um, very appreciative of your contribution.
That's been very helpful. Look, I'm gonna have a lunch break
because someone's gotta eat people at the back there.
You can hopefully you got time to go and have some lunch.
Thank you. Oh, excuse myself. Yes. Thank you very much.
So we are gonna come back at one o'clock, um, members.
Yep. Yeah. So we'll see you soon. Yeah. One o'clock drive.
We're gonna go there.